O you, very dear son, I have completed this book for you which is the end of the science of medicine along with its explanation, and I have made the end by its expositions and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is confined in our region and is foreign to all things everywhere, the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have corrupted. And from these (things) has come error and vanity, and intentions have been closed and knowledge has been alienated.
I seem to want to revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the iron cauteries, and the other instruments of work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for them, as necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant. And one who engages in this must be well-versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the function of the limbs, their forms and connections and separations of them; and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of joints, and the movement and resting places, and the direction of their issue.
And therefore Hippocrates says that name without work is nothing, and the same in the art of surgery.
We will tell you at the beginning of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, let him beware that he does not err and that he does not operate on men; thus I have seen many times more than those who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Because I saw a madman who cut open one abscess of scrofula (or neck) of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
And I saw another man who pulled out a large stone from an old man, and he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within four days.
And I had been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it out he would die.
And there was another doctor who took care of a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was an injury; and the doctors, filled with ignorance, set the break above the wound using strong force and did not leave any splint on the wound, but left it in such a state; and he commanded that it should not be loosened; and it remained like that until the leg became swollen and the feet and came to destruction.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to loosen his leg; and when I loosened it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But the corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not heal it; and the corruption did not stop moving through the member until the member was completely lost.
And a second eye, or other mirror, which collapses an abscess and then heats it through the malice of its lordship.
For a boil, when it is filled with black bile, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a position that all the corrupted matter can be removed.
And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: one in which there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to take care, so that the foolish may not be able to speak ill of you.
Take care of your weapons, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and choose the best course so that by God's grace you come to salvation and be praised; and leave frightening diseases in despair of good health; and take away your weapons from that which causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can leave this world for the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of evil disease lest you be called foolish."
I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
The first chapters concern fire cauteries and medical cauteries for agues, and the chapters are arranged from head to feet; and concerning the shapes of instruments, and iron implements of cautery, and everything necessary in this work.
The second chapters are about cutting and boring, and about blistering and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and these chapters are arranged and concerning the shapes of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from head to feet, and concerning the shapes of instruments.
Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are lengthy words and subtle science and secret answers; and many wise men spoke of it, and agreed with this; and they trusted little their words, for I will shorten it.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, regardless of two complexions: namely, hot and moist complexion, and dry and moist complexion.
In a hot and dry constitution, some say that fire cautery is great aid; but others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not useful for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claim that fire cautery is great aid for hot and dry diseases in men's bodies. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find the body cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it occasionally by experience.
And every way, do not interfere except for those who have tested it and who know by long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and their occurrences and the time span; we are not afraid of other complexions especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all mirrors agreed and conformed to the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of cure, and of greater benefit than cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come outside the member being cooked, and harms no other member unless named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another by spreading, and bring great pain to the sick member; and perhaps kill the patient.
Fire due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance does not cause this if there is no excess.
And I have found this out by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is true regarding these matters; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of the words, because I do not like to take away the secret that is hidden or revealed by fire, nor the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstration; accept it in your thoughts.
Know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose companions.
And I say that cautery is fitting in every time, because the harms happening are held back by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if cauterizations are necessary for pain, except when it cannot wait for the time when greater damage does not come to the member.
And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for the illness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is not only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its quick effectiveness, and because of the virtue of its work and of its dominion.
And sometimes the illness comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluities are gathered in him through the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauterization is administered in its place or where there is little superfluity and moisture, as in dense cauterizations for pain, and similarly, such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the rear of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth more than medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. Therefore, it is worth noting that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not as the intention of foolish physicians.
They said that gold cauteries are superior to iron ones, and they said this not without reason due to the quality of gold and its nobility; and they said that the heads of cauteries do not cause necrosis, but this is not true for all cases, as I have experienced, and found it to be true in some men; and gold cauteries are superior to iron ones, as they say.
And although you may think that you can tell when an instrument of gold is hot by its color, it may still be cool inside, and sometimes it becomes cold; and if heated too much, it will become red-hot; thus there are many difficulties in this matter.
And for this reason we use fire cautery, which has been prepared for our work.
I have ordered you this chapter on the head from neck to feet, because the veins will be easier to find.
olive oil cautery
This cautery is effective for both moist and cold conditions of the brain, and it can be used to treat a disease called "soda", as well as many humors that descend from the head into the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed all illnesses caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode (a term for brain swelling), apoplexy, and similar conditions.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, cleansing the head four or five times, according to what the qualities and age and the habit of the sick person can tolerate; and then, after the patient's head, perform the procedure.
Then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a low stool; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will come together, it will bleed. Warm up the cautery which is called "olivare", as follows:
And place it on the bleeding site marked with ink, and draw it downward and pull your hand slowly while rotating; then wash your hand immediately, and return the lever if you see the bone (the little finger). If you don't see it, continue to use the cautery as I told you until you see the bone; afterwards, take a small piece of linen, put it soft cotton inside, and place it on the site, and leave it for three days; after that, put damp cloth over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterward, treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
And as the ancients said, when a wound remains unopened longer, it drains more; and for this reason, if possible, help it to heal faster.
And they said that the part of the bone should be burnt as much as possible with the cautery, and then the burnt area of the bone should be reattached and healed.
And they said to burn it so much that a piece of bone is burnt as wide as the size of a walnut, for this reason because the humors come out quickly; and the wound should be left unopened for a long time afterwards, then it should be cured and closed soon.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every respect, except for certain men who have fear; and it appears that I should let it go; for the head becomes weakened by continuous solutions in nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, and the first impression of cautery seems to be more healing and beneficial to me, and from this use I work towards a remedy together with salvation.
of old pain in the head
When the head has long-lasting chronic pain, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, oils and poultices; and if they make the cautery that we have previously mentioned, it is not worthwhile.
Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said before.
Make the cautery on each side of the patient's head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery called "vasselz"; it is one of three in which ventouses are placed; hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the sides of the head should be more subtle than those with which the midpoint of the head is cauterized, and this is the shape:
In the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease extends to the oil, and the head is purged with various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases have been performed but do not help; then cauteries are applied according to two methods, that is, medicine for ague and fire.
The cautery for medicine ague is that you take a small onion and remove its skin, cut it in two, each half to be applied to one shoulder, and then make the incision where the pain is so that you can place the onion under the skin; and when it has been placed, press and hold it tightly for 12 hours. Then release it and apply hot mustard oil to the onion and leave the wound in this state for 2 or 3 days, then cover it with a linen cloth soaked in butter.
After the onion treatment until it is healed; and if you see that this does not work, use one of the burning medicines that I have written or treat with the 10th remedy for burning medicines.
The fire cautery is as follows. Heat the iron rod in this manner:
It is called "clos" because the tip is shaped like a claw or has one point of curvature and has a small appearance; it should be placed on the painful area, and hold your hand and lightly press the iron a little until half of its width is burned; withdraw your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is on the outside, and draw out abundance of blood.
Then put cotton in oil of lard, and place it on the area for three days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine using the cautery called "cultellare," at its entire point, be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
Of emigraine (This line is difficult to translate with certainty due to its archaic language and potential abbreviations. A possible translation could be "from migraines" or "about migraines", but it's not entirely clear from the given text.)
When treating migraines, as previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, you see that cauterization has already been mentioned in the medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and press it gently along a line half a finger's length, remove your hand once, and hold it so as not to cover the artery and not come to the bone; and beware of the jaw that does not move when eating, and the nerves should have no gaze but at the jaw and spasms should not come upon the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear, especially for those who do not know or are untrained; leave the procedure in midway; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you at length where it should be done in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you find, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two blades; this cautery is better than the one and more helpful.
Of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain in the ear due to coldness does not improve with medications and other treatments as we have said in the division, and it persists, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", here is its form:
After burning the entire sick ear, or around both places where the pain is located, move away from the ear's root about a small distance since you have marked its location; and place 10 cauteries around each ear; after healing the wound until it heals completely.
Torture of the mouth
Torture that needs to be cured by cautery is not for those that move from the saliva, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and not to do cautery on similar things that come from scurvy and spasm of nerves.
When curing this type of torture that moves from the saliva of the eyes and purges of the head and gargarism, and it is not worth it, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another slightly farther from the temple, and the third in the corner of the mouth; place the cautery in the open healthy part, and make the cautery towards the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as far as a fist; leave the cautery until half of its curvature is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And the shape of the surgeon's tool that we have mentioned is similar, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knives be somewhat larger; afterwards, cure the wound as I have previously said, until it heals.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then administer four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the head, one at the "vessel" place as we have previously said, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat accordingly as we have said before.
The bed for the paralytic.
For this ailment, give the patient large ears and round pills made of cerebrum; afterwards, anoint the head of the patient all over, and place the plaster of mustard seed (which is written or treated as an ointment) on his occiput; and this is the method of cautery: do it as I have said.
If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if not, perform four cauteries on the head from the chin to the neck, leaving a space of two fingers between each cautery, and treat it as with other treatments, and if necessary, apply one cautery in the middle, and if needed, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healthy; and the cauteries that are called "olivare," as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be cleansed with years and as previously said; afterwards cleanse the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and 1 at the back and 4 above the spine of the neck; and if there is more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make 4 cauteries above the spine of the back; leave it until the deeper part is burned, then wash your hand; afterwards cure it until it is healthy, and remove the cautery which is called "olivare" as previously said.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cauteries except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure this, make him gargle and chew thoroughly with soft foods; afterwards hold the child in a sitting position, and apply one cautery as previously stated, and another cautery on the navel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterized area be olive-shaped as I have previously stated.
If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is the superfluity declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been said before in the division.
Then cross the sick person's arms, and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply a linen strip well made, as a circle, place it around their head; then prick the linen with thorns of old goatskin, heat the linen gently over the fire so that it can be borne by the sick person; then empty the circle from inside the head and allow it to cool; perform this on the patient every week with good care until they are well.
If you wish to cauterize it, make multiple pricks throughout the entire cautery. This method of cauterizing reduces the brain greatly; then place damp cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
Of the eyes When the eyes begin to come first through the signs that I have said in the division, then commence and give the patient something purifying the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
After that, command him to lie on his back, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two fire cauterizations on the two temples where the symptoms of the eyes are at the two eyes together, or in one if they are in one; and touch all the cautery with all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and pay attention to the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making incisions in caution how to stop it; and sometimes a fire cautery or some other substance is made under the two bones at the back.
The tears of the body
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed to be above the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, fluid, mucous substances, then perform the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter: two cauterizations on the temples, two cauterizations where the eyebrows are beneath the skull bones; if necessary, cauterize carefully above the eyelid with a small cauterization.
The tears of the body within the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of hot cochineal; afterwards let him drink a cup of olive oil cautery and two cauteries called "clavilis" on top of each scrotum, a little under the hair; and beware of the artery that you do not cover it. And here is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery called "olivare". Here is its form:
And if you wish to do it [the cautery], make two [cauterizations] on the two witches as long as they are; and do not remove your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the oil Sometimes the hairs of the oils are converted to the pardons (a type of wound or sore), and prick the oil, and [one] makes cauteries according to two ways: that is to say, with fire, or with a burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient on a paper with the hairs marked as if it were the fern leaf of myrtle, and the beginning of the sign should be cut into the hairs; then put moistened cotton soaked in egg white and musk oil on top of the oil, then heat the cautery to the form specified here:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked many times, let the area be burned; and the signs of healing for the treatment are that you see the paper recede and the hairs rise to the oil point; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for 3 days; then put moistened cotton in butter so that the burn is removed; after treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs appear and the skin becomes soft, then begin the fire cautery on the same place again, as you did before; and if the hairs curl up, cauterize it until the skin returns to its natural state, is flat, and does not produce any oil from the pores.
The cautery of medical heat is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then take a parchment and draw its shape like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and hot sand, each one cubit, and grind them together well; and make it quickly, so it does not cool; then spread it over the drawn shape as on the leaf of myrtle, and put the hairs under it; if the patient has only one oil, it should be worked on one [part], and if in both [parts]; and put cotton moistened with egg white beneath the oil; and let the patient's arm be healthy and press your finger showing above the medicine, and press lightly each time the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for it burns like fire. When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine from your hand. And when the biting (inflammation) has passed, lift up the affected area and observe if the stone (abscess) is raised in the same way as it was raised by fire or incision; and if it is like that, it is good. If not, apply more medicine on the affected area or continue with the existing medicine until your work (treatment) is equal, and the edges are precise; then place damp cotton wool on it until the heat subsides, afterwards cure the affected area with ointment called "diaphensis" and other remedies until it heals.
And if you need to be careful with your treatment so that the medicine does not harm the edges. And if the stone (abscess) becomes soft after and the hairs prick in the oil, start applying medicine on that affected area which has been properly purified, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it heals; and this is the shape of the mulleth (mullein) leaf.
And know that the hairs of humans are diverse in size and according to this your treatment should be adapted; do not deviate from the correct path for the one who is studying this art.
Treatment of a fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in a basin of warm water or on a piece of wool soaked in egg white or linen dipped in oil; then heat the cautery and bring it close to the fistula in the shape of a pen nib, along with the cautery itself. If you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should be like a tent; but regardless, what matters is that it is heated for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it and extract the pus forcefully; then place the heated cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the end of the fistula with oil, so as not to cause burns; place the cautery in the fat of the oil and let it corrode.
1. If you start the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, continue the cautery again once, and if necessary, let it rest for 3 days; afterwards put soft cotton in butter on it, and apply the drying ointment until it heals, and if after 40 days it is not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king, according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand a fistula and open its opening; afterwards put one subtle camphor into the opening in the form: and they fill it with the quantity of one and a half plum seeds; and hold your hand firmly on the camphor, and do not let the patient move at all, until the melted plum dissolves into its oil; and it is necessary to put olive oil on the patient's cotton wool soaked in egg white or in honey: the plum resin will heal the fistula, and the wound will heal miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, you must administer pepper to the nose and bring the fistula back into the warm body, as required in its proper place.
cavities in lips Many times there appear cavities in lips, which are called "hair," and also in children's lips.
When you treat these cavities as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then boil a small cautery knife using this form:
And place it quickly into these cavities until it reaches the wound, then cure the place with lime until it is healed.
of the abscess in the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or the eye, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after it produces pus and swells and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: then you must have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron is heated to the point of penetrating it, and at its base; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
The movement of the teeth
If the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after that, heat the cautery as described below so that a rod can be placed on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside quickly, keeping your hand such that the patient feels the heat approaching to the root of the tooth; after releasing your hand, repeat the cautery according to your will; after filling the patient's mouth with warm salt water, hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gums are held tight, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
From the pain of the teeth
When the pain of the teeth comes from cold or wetness, and there is no relief from heating or medicines, then it will be necessary to resort to cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is as follows: Take butter from a cow, and heat the end of an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a linen cloth, wetting it in warm butter. Place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it is cooled; do this repeatedly until its effect reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and wool soaked in cold butter, place it again on the tooth and heat a red-hot iron above the tooth.
The cautery combined with fire is such that you take a dog or cat iron, and it should be thick enough so the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cauter, the form will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauter is cooled; do this often, as the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of applying the cautery, then blow hard; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofulas are of a cold flux and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery as described below, and make two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, depending on its size, until it reaches the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days; place moistened cotton wool on top to remove the pus; afterwards, cure the area with oil of anise and turpentine until it is healed.
When the plaques conquer in the throat channel, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards, apply cautery to the root of the neck and be careful not to go near the throat, but only a little. Then apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and the spine, and use the one called "clavile" in our manner as described before; and treat the area until it is healed as we have said before.
The tooth When all and the disease of pormon are of cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the disease is old, make two fire cauterizations on the forearm; and there should be another cautery placed between the two breasts; and let it be the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the shape as previously described.
And if you wish, make a puncture cautery using the tip of the cautery called "point" with the shape previously described in the ear disease; and let the point be up to 30 or thereabouts. After curing the area as previously stated, let the cauterization be at four fingers according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make them in two applications (copies).
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After placing the patient on their back and side; after locating the cavity which is within the joint with your left hand's fingertips; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here:
and pierce the cavity until it reaches the costal area, and the figure of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and for this reason, the cautery is made with the one that has two nerves, because the shape of the cauterization is shown by these cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has two nerves:
And sometimes, it is tied on top of this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After placing the caution on it, break with silk and then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
If it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then do caution on top of the thick part of the clavicle or many cauterizations in pricking. Because the joint is reconnected, and the moisture is removed and the patient becomes healthy.
the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients say that for pleurisy, one should perform cauteries with the roots of aractoria; and in this manner: take a long root of aractoria, the largest you can find, and let it be dry and also as big and long as your thumb; anoint it with oil, place it on fire, and cauterize one cautery between the nipple and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area beneath the beard; and two more along the fifth costal cartilage, declining slightly behind a bit; and one more at the side, and one more above the stomach, and one more between the shoulders, and two more on the sides of the ribs away from the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but proceed gently as when sniffing.
And an ancient said that one uses a cautery resembling .i. razor, and heats it up and places it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain subsides as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear, or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse (as we have said in the divisions of cures), and it does not help, then apply three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
One method is to make four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver cautery we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be conscious on his back.
And another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and cut the skin that is near the mouse, where the patient's cough comes towards his left side, and lift the incisions you make on the skin according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After placing the two inflamed nerves close together so that the pores are pierced from the other side, draw the cautery forcefully out. Thus there will be four. And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery on the two nerves. After curing it when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is equivalent to the other remedies mentioned earlier.
After inserting the cautery into the ulcerated part of the member, heat it until it becomes hot, then remove the cautery and apply an ointment on the ulcer; this is for edema.
Cauterizing does not help for edema, except in the manner known as "asclytes". When you treat it according to the ways that we have said in the divisions, and your treatment is of no use, then you must make four cauteries around the boil, one on the stomach, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one where the pain is; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the boil.
After leaving the fire cautery open for a long time to expel pus, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle as we have shown before; and for the back it should be olive oil, as it has been previously stated.
of the inflammation of feet When the feet are swollen in those who are edematous, and filled with citric acid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the ring finger and little finger; hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, otherwise the citric acid would be forced out, and let the cautery be in this form:
After making .2 cauteries for each leg with the tip of the knife; let one cautery be long, located in front of the knee and the other behind it, within the leg; leave the cauteries above for a long time to cure, allowing the citric acid to settle; after healing the other wounds as we have said.
treatment of edema
When the swelling of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, while the digestive and retentive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then do one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before (cautery of the stomach), around the circle; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one subtle cautery clavile, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do a cautery on the joint, and one cautery on each isle, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure for hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are founded or more than one and are old, large, cold and corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if cauteries are made: 4 on the spine of the back, that which is completely turned backwards below the coccyx and triangularly, and 1 cautery under the buttock. 2 times;
If you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and the face swells up, then make one large cautery on the stomach, as stated before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen, all with a long cauterizing iron; leave the cautery open for a long time. After healing, treat it until it is healthy.
of the charnoisiteit which is called "thelul"
When you burn the ulcer, heat the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all over the ulcer being burned; and let your hand be there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, thus burning it clean; do this once or twice, and if there is much ulcer, cauterize each one as we have said; after the care of ointments useful until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large cautery on the bladder, it will have more help.
From an improperly healed wound
If the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
When a fistula comes, it is swollen and full of pus and corrupt matter, you must probe it thoroughly with great subtlety, and make sure you know its depth entirely. After cleaning the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the size of the cavity, and continue burning until the surrounding flesh and matter are burnt away, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the extent of the wound; beware not to burn the nerves nearby and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the body of the bladder and the intestines, be careful with these areas, and do not act elsewhere except in charnut, and think that it is not persistent; afterwards cure the area until it is healed, if the area is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is healed entirely; but if the matter has not been removed, then know that the area is open, and the bone is corrupted at the spot; and thus as one of those we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain of cold comes to the kidneys and of large swelling, and it does not take on female form, then it is necessary that you perform cautery over the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cautery as we have previously said; and if we cauterize in milk, it will have four cauteries in line, and it will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and soft due to cold or moisture, and the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, and both should be as long as the little finger; and make one incision behind the back, or two if needed; and the incisions should be parallel to each other according to the form mentioned before.
of the kidney When the kidney is cold and moist and cannot conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then you must make four cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the caution of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and the incisions should be parallel to each other, as we have said.
Of the wound
When the viscous humors sink into the wound of the thigh, and for this reason it becomes silent from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints of the limb are found to be separated, if you must cauterize the patient on the wound of the thigh with .i. cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the joint around the wound so that the wound is within the circle; and if the cauteries are like those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make four large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; and heal it until it is healed.
Of the pain of the haunch When pain comes in the hollow of the haunch, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division but the cure is of no use, and the illness is old: therefore you must purge the patient from the large humors with fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
After this, you make the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: either with burning substances, or fire cautery. The fire cautery is according to many ways, one of which is as follows: you perform four triangular cauteries on the hollow of the haunch, and make a good depth and width, and have space between each cautery the size of a die, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is performed in the middle on the top of the haunch, so there are four according to this shape:
And if you see, cauterize the circular cautery in the dislocation of the shoulder blade; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire shoulder blade, and all the edges of the wound are burned.
And it is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the shoulder blade and does not reach the thigh nor the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, two cauteries should be applied where the patient says that the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle .4 fingers, on the left side a little bit; and let the cauteries be cutleries, and burn the edge of the wound; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain with 2 or 4 points, which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, do more; and if the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, apply a cautery with a cutlery or circular tool, but be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery too much so as to burn nerves and large arteries, and not to cause the patient more harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who made a fire cautery on the ankle bone, and they let it be for so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the foot also, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly purge of which they died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this method. // The wise will say about the hock cautery, here is how it is done, make a nail of such size as a small finger's joint or slightly smaller, and be perpendicular or diagonal between each other at a distance equal to the diameter of a nut, and the distance between each should be two fingers apart, and they should be round like nuts, and there should be one handle of iron well made; this is the shape:
And heat it up until it becomes completely red and boiling hot, and then put it on the ill ankle, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery and let it rest for four days. Then apply plaster made of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use little of this fire cautery due to its fearsome aspect, and few know how to use it effectively; however, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured by those who can, and where it can be applied.
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether it be from falling or impact or too much evacuation, or like the effects of cold matter spreading, none of these symptoms call for cauteries, except in the case of cold matter infusion.
It is necessary, after this, that the patient be emptied of foul pills or similar things, which are to be placed on the back, where the pain is felt, three lines marked with ink, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to the strength and quantity that the patient can tolerate; and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do 4 cauteries or 2 according to the medium-sized cautery in this form:
Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they become constipated, and fear; and you find in the lower spine on the back and in our appearance which appears above the other spines.
When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this shape.
The first sentence to translate is: "The fire cautery increases each part of the spine. If you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing 2 or 3 lines, and let the tips be close to each other. After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, ensure that you do not administer cautery in a gumboil that is in nerve spasm."
"of the pain of the joints"
"When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that has spread throughout all members of the body and when the pain occurs in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, it is treated with cauteries as follows: make a hot iron cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:"
And if it is necessary for you to prick the face of the foot, make a fire cautery all over the cautery called "point". And if pain comes up to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, make a fire cautery on each knee four times or four in each part, all over the olive oil cautery; and if more is needed, do more, but do not hold your hand too long until the fat of the skin is burned.
And if the pain descends to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. If the pain is in the hands, do pricks around the wrist two lines; if there remains no more pain in the fingers, do pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and think about medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge the fever, he will be healed with God's help.
The dislocation of the shoulder joint due to moisture can be treated by resetting it. If it repeatedly dislocates with slight movement, you must first reset the dislocation. When resetting a dislocation, the head of the humerus bone should be pushed back into its socket. This treatment is also known as reduction of the shoulder joint.
When eruptions come in anger, and the bowels descend to the kidneys and this is new, it is necessary that when you wish to cure it, you must not let him eat that day; and he should use things which relax the stomach, so that the feces descend from his stomach; afterwards have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his flank as long as the bowels are repaired, and hold them at your sides, and sign with a mark like half of a circle above the abdomen; then heat the cautery in the shape as shown here:
And let it be white and let him pass stools. Then move the bowels back to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so they do not return; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and another one under him who holds his hands; then put the cautery over the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not burst when you make the cautery; and that you do not burn him; and that by these means the patient does not die, or other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. It is necessary that the cauteries for children are subtle according to their size, and those of adults also large according to their size; after three days, cure the wound caused by the cautery with butter so that the burn is removed; after that, cure other medicines until he is well, and lay the patient for forty days on his back so that the wound heals well; it is necessary that his bedding be left long, so that the bowels do not burst when he gets up to go to his chambers.
And after 40 days, when it wants to rise, bring a well-made bandage and keep it for another 40 days; let him have good rest, so that he should work little and take care not to fill too much with drinking and eating, and not to raise too much voice; and when he follows this teaching, he will be completely healthy. And I shall say afterwards the cure of amputation in its chapter. of the wound from the belly
When the wounds occur in other bellies and are known to not grow more, make one cautery of the right size according to its quantity and let it be burned one-third of the skin; after that cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this form:
But first mark the joint with ink and draw a line over the dislocation site, and another one away from it. Then place your hand on top of the entire cautery. However, the first cauteries are easier and more manageable.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether it is from a fall or injury, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the medicine does not cure it, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, and nature, as well as its location in terms of twisting and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, start another one immediately on top of the first, for custom dictates that the cauteries should move to the nearest limb until the patient is healed.
To mix (or compound) medicine
The mixing of medicine is sometimes greatly aided by the use of cautery, and especially so for those who suffer from illness arising from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care that the illness is in its early stages, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or linger, then perform five cauteries on the head: one at the nape of the neck, another near the front at the end of the hair; two at each temple; and one behind the ear; leave your hand long enough for the cautery to reach the bone, and so that the scorch marks come out beyond the skin so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize over the mice according to what is before.
And if the medicine has spread all over, it will surely disappear, then you must cauterize with those cauteries we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery at the nape of the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one at the buttock and another under it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the legs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and over the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the lower back, and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more cautery you do, the more help it provides and benefits [the patient]; and know that the sick do not feel pain during cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. The cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the art of ironwork. Afterward, clean the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it heals.
Cauterize the wound with a hot iron.
When inflammation appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then cauterize the affected member according to its size and shape; and let the cautery be a little deeper than the thickness of the skin. Then cure it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes a cauterization is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the site of the nerve that immobilizes the limb, and in this way the inflammation is removed; but let no one interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the movement of the nerves in the body.
From the linen cloth [or fabric]
When the disease called "albaras" is recognized, and the instruments of medicine are of no use, then cauterize it with a shallow cautery, according to the thickness of the skin involved, until the blister is removed and the color changes; then cure it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, as well as pig's blood and goose blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together and bind it with a cloth; apply it to the location until it heals.
treating canker with cauterization
When a boil first appears and you want to stop it, you should cauterize with the cautery that resembles a circle around the boil's circumference. Although some wise men say to cauterize in the middle of the boil; however, this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen once; and a more proper thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule," as we have said in terms of cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot grow
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which grows slowly due to excess or because the patient is aged (meaning very old) and has little blood, or because of the time; and you want it to grow faster: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking it; afterwards, let it be. For it will hasten to grow.
And if you see it pierced entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
Place your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the boil, and make sure that the cautery is such that the patient feels it burning in this way so that the course of the pus is clear. Afterward, cure it completely when it is perfectly healed.
the treatment with fire by iron
Another form of illness is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a consumption of the limb, because it consumes the limbs just like fire dries out damp wood. If you see this disease in a place where it can be cauterized with fire, then heat the cautery to a small and large size, according to the location or the site of the illness; after the cauterization of all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted is removed. Then leave it for four days, and put soft soothing cauterized broth on the affected areas with oil until the burns caused by the fire are healed, and all the corruption is gone. After the cure with ointments generates healthy skin. And if you see after four days that healthy skin does not grow, it's good; but if this doesn't happen, start cauterizing again on the remaining corrupted parts. And this consumption has sometimes been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already mentioned the cure for hot medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
The coming pricks to the feet
It often happens that a disease called "clos" comes to the feet, which is a large, hard blister that pricks the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways: fire cautery and hot water cautery. The fire cautery is as follows: you heat one cauterizer like a feather from a raven's wing, made of good iron to the size that can penetrate the nail from all sides, and it should have subtle edges; after heating it very hot on the nail, hold your hand all around the nail until it reaches the nail bed; and leave it for three days until pus begins to come out; then make a plaster of coarse herbs ground with oil, and leave the plaster over the entire area all night, and the cauterizer will dry and be pulled out by its roots. Then heal the wound with soothing ointment until it is healed.
If the body is turned inside out by an external injury, which often happens in hands and feet, you should apply hot water cautery; and it is done as follows: take a catheter of raven or iron, or a feather from a raven's wing, and place it on the nail and hold it, that is to say, pricks the blisters; then place the catheter so that it surrounds it completely, then put a little hot water, and keep your hand firm, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the catheter reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep to the root; and let the patient suffer a little biting by the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will dry out all its roots. Do this repeatedly until you heal all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that soothe the pain.
The Cure for Shaking (or Trembling)
For anyone who shakes due to coldness of the nerves, or quartan fever or another, you should apply four or five cauteries on the spinal column between each spine; one cautery in the buttocks and one on the stomach using an olive oil cautery; this will stop the shaking and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
of putrid pustules (or boils)
Sometimes, pustules that are putrid and come from large corrupted matter appear on the outside of the body. In such a case, at first when they appear, it is necessary to apply a cautery on top of each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made of myrtle stick or a long root of aristolochia, or a cautery with a lentil shape. Sometimes, they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter that comes from them is discharged, and they become healthy; however, it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are great evacuations of blood from the cut artery in the wound that appears on the surface or at the incision of an abscess or the cauterization of a member, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to bleed out.
However, when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound vein and hold it very tight until the blood is stopped flowing; then apply the olive oil cauterizer (smaller or larger) as many times as necessary until it is all red; next take .i., either large or small depending on the size of the wound and the location in which the artery is severed, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cauterizer there until the bleeding has been stopped.
And if a jump occurs when you place your hand on the vein, and the fire cautery is extinguished, take immediately another cautery that is near the fire.
Continue to do this one after the other until the vein is closed; and beware not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and let no further harm come upon the patient; know that when blood stops flowing from the artery, it cannot be properly stopped when the artery is large unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated beforehand, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it that can stop the blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Whoever brings about the constriction of a narrow ligature or placing hot things on it, or similar things, will not benefit if it does not help.
And if this happens to anyone who has neither sight nor medicine at hand, he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it remains swollen above the wound and the vein; and he must not move it, but the cold moisture should often be applied so that it becomes very cold until the wound is frozen and thickened and remains swollen; and make inquiries in advance for the cauteries and medicines needed.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and we explained the origins and instruments and forms of cauteries; I placed that chapter on the head to the feet, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same way because those things are easier to understand when they are presented in order.
And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to engage in folly. For many ways of people come to treatment. Those who are so ailing with their disease that they die easily from the stupidity they find due to their illness, and from the great cruelty of its malice; and one should have fear of these. And of those who give you their advice, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the patient is contemptuous. It is not advisable that you should consent to these who come to you who have this manner, but place more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not reveal carelessly but wisely of those about which you are certain, and from which you can take and learn; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom salvation is converted; and this will help you acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
Moreover, I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to that which is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have explained from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those matters from which you will need assistance.
The head full of water
This disease often comes to children during birth, and when the head of the child is pressed too hard; and sometimes it happens due to a reason that we are not aware of.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and for all those I have seen, death was swift; therefore, it seems to me that it is worthwhile to stop the work in some treatments.
I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and it swelled each day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture collected under the skull between the brain and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out; and here is the form of the lancet:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see the fissures of the head are opened on each side, and they do not respond when you press them from within, then it is necessary that you make four cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Then remove the moisture entirely from outside. Afterwards strain the cuts with linen and powder, and put vinegar and oil, and leave it in this condition until the fifth day; then unbind, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head swell gradually, and give the patient dried meat of a moist animal as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incising is that you examine the size of the abscess, and gather the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Then make the incision according to what you can, and be careful not to cut the artery; and let some blood flow out, so that the patient dies a proper death due to blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
of remedy
When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarrah" in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and medicine does not help, then the last cure is the cautery on the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them (the arteries), you should have the patient lean back; then rub his neck with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's collar with one cloth; then look where the veins are, and the heads of the left and right ones are behind the ears, and they are tied down; then mark the heads of incision, then cut each one with a sharp spatula of two parts until the incision reaches the bone, but through the wide neck.
And if you see it (the artery), push the sharp spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting as you would through two.
And when the vein is cut, it jumps up without ceasing continuously.
And if the artery does not open when touched, you must measure the space of three fingers, then make an incision up to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be allowed to come out is 7 cubits [cubic inches], approximately a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery. Then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without swelling, if the cut that is incised does not cause an abscess, then hold the wound closed and tie it up, and apply ointment until it heals.
of emigration
When an old emigration comes and acute catarrh arrives, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples, and an old foolish person becomes senile with similar things; it is treated by methods of medicine, but it does not help at all. If the arteries in the temples are opened and cauterized, as we have mentioned, it will help.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hairs at the base of his temples, and listens to the opening artery in the temple because it opens well through beating. It can be easily found except in some cold men. If it is found, the patient strains its neck with some cloth, then rubs the place with a rough cloth and moistens the place with hot water until the arteries appear clearly; then take the spatula of this form:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you find the artery, then pull it up to the tweezers and remove all the tissues that are under each side. If the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the scissors, then cut from that side according to the size of the two shoulders. For if it is not cut, it will not come out entirely without difficulty.
And draw out the blood from the .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the arteries are large, it is necessary that you tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound is closed and bleeding stops; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures at that same hour, and if you see fit, cauterize the wound with the cautery knife up to the bone until the pieces are cut through; and this is the moveable work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
For the cauteries are aid for finishing the injuries: which is of greater help to the injured. For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the area with old cotton and put a well-made tourniquet on top; and when you loosen them, cure it with dry medicines that cause charring, and with tourniquets, until it is healed; and if without the incision of the artery as much as you work, you hurry to cover it by cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze your hand so that the wound does not bleed; and if this is not present, put your hand on the area until it freezes, and rub the area with cold water until it stops bleeding, and squeeze as necessary; and the moveable and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery knife, but the cuts should be well spaced to keep the heat longer. When the thermometer is too thin, it retains less heat. And it should be between two knuckles, one of which is thicker in space, and when you have inserted it into the vein by two leagues, and you heat the iron hot until it reaches the bone, and then cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be spaced between two joints because it is not always welded with this cautery all over; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
When the tears of the eyes run down the veins that are above the head of the face and medicine treatment does not help it, and you see the patient frowning, and notice his forehead trembling like shivers; and if they are tender and moist so that the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
And they called it the ancient "contused cure", and you will do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you will make 3 cuts or evenly on the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one of the cuts shall be as two fingers all along the forehead below, and the others 2 at 2 costal zones above the eyelids, and watch out for the incision of the arteries that are at the 2 costal zones above the eyelids; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the 2 jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of 3 fingers joined.
The first incision is made from the temple down to the second incision; and peel off all the cartilage that is between the two cuts on top of the bone, then proceed from the middle incision down to the other second, and pull out this spatula-like instrument.
Insert the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision; it is well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not sharp, and it has this shape: Place the cutting edge of the instrument towards the cartilage and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision. Cut all the tendons that descend from the head to the hairs as long as the incision is continuous up to where the cartilage opens, then proceed in the middle incision down to the other opening; and then press equally on the blood and express the liquid for the blood taken; then place a piece of old cotton fabric in each incision, put moistened linen cloths soaked in wine and oil and honey on top, and make sure no pus comes out; on the third day undo the suture, and apply a large amount of cold water, then treat with ointment made of basilicon and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
The root of the hairs
When a sharp catarrh usually comes, and you see the hairs becoming thin and small, and the vision becomes dimmed, and paper burnt; and the hair falls out, and the head aches with acute pain, and the patient coughs; then know by these symptoms that those materials and this catarrh do not come from just one vein, but several. And the cure that is to be made if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to lean back their head, then make a large cut across the forehead and another along its length. [This means to cut from one temple to the other across the forehead.] Let your hand be far enough away from the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then insert cotton soaked in vinegar and oil between the two sides of the cut, and tie linen over it. Then place damp cloths on it and beware of hot abscesses; when it has been removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat with things that promote the growth of char.
In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour, and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them; administer it in these wounds to promote healing throughout.
for the draining of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, stones or similar things like iron; seeds, such as peas, beans or lentils; or flowing things such as water and silks and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or some other thing that does not fit in the ear, nor enters into the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, distill a little of violet oil or camphor oil, then apply extraction; and make him sneeze with powders, and stop up the nostrils when sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear upwards. Often times pus comes from this cure; and if it does not come out, apply extraction with fine tweezers, as follows:
If it jumps out with tweezers, that is good; if not, apply extraction with fine and slender onion or a needle, and if it does not come out by this means, make a cane from beeswax and push the head of the cane or ear tube deeply into the ear so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out forcefully, as often times pus comes in this way; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take glue of whatever kind you have on hand, and place it around an instrument suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatnot, and pull it out. And if it does not jump out with all these things we have said, you should hurry to incise the ear before an abscess comes, and spasm occurs; and the method of incision is that you first cleanse the patient's head and draw blood according to the measure of its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or the place it depends on; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it immediately into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. And if it is swollen and growing, administer extraction; and if it cannot be drained, administer a thin and fine probe according to this form:
If it is swollen and growing, make an incision of that swelling. But do not do this if you think the swelling is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made several cuts; then extract it with fine pliers dipped in vinegar or wine, as we have said, so that the extraction is straight.
In water that drips into the ear, the patient should use warm compresses of early herbs and stuff the ear with cotton. Let it lie on that ear itself or let the water fall out if it jumps. If it does not jump, take several thin and light stones according to the length of your finger and heat one slightly in the fire; put a piece of cloth or linen from the ear into the patient's mouth, and strike one stone against another on the stone in the ear, and hit with another stone on the striking stone; keep doing this with one stone against another until the water jumps out completely, and then it will jump out entirely; and if you see, take a feather and push one end into the ear, and take hold of the other end of the feather with fire until the outermost feather is burned; then repeat this with other feathers until the water jumps out completely, as we have said in the earlier section.
In the extraction of small animals, like fleas and similar things, treat them as we have said in the division; but if they are large and can be felt, bring tools for extraction such as tweezers; and it is easier to remove what is in the ear.
In the extraction of earwigs, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in treating with distillations, it does not help; if there are no worms present, take the thread of this form:
Make it narrow on one side and wide on the other. Insert the most subtle end into the ear according to the degree of suffering of the patient, then grasp the whole string; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey, stop up around the string with cotton as I have said in the previous chapter; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in removing earwigs, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this device as you see here:
And make a container of silver or tin placed below one small hole, and above it cover with a distiller; and for pressing within the distillation have one device made of tin well-made for this purpose, and if you see take one scraper and wind around its tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish in the container, and let it be in the ear; then push down into the scraper with all the cotton and press moderately until the oil is distilled or rises from the ear; and the patient will feel the scent within, and let one spoonful of the distillation be heated with fire as if it were being distilled in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be very good.
of the earstopping
No child is born without having at least one hole in the ear; and this same thing happens with adults due to an ear infection or puss within the ear, and this ear infection sometimes completely fills the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a small amount of pus discharged from the ear, which can be clearly seen.
Therefore, when it comes in completely and cannot be seen, it is of grave healing in various positions, and in such a case, you must place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, you should open it entirely with that spatula as shown here:
And should be entirely sharp in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the opening is of flesh or cartilage of the ear, you should hold with subtle tweezers, and strike gently until the cartilage is completely removed.
And if the opening is deep in the ear, take a sharp, subtle probe and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the ear canal. If you feel the opening causing pain to the patient when they hear, pierce gently, but do not harm the nerves of the ear; then insert an ear wick according to the size of the wound, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Apply this daily until the wound is healed, take a linen cloth and soak it in rose oil and powdered vitriol; if you see the ear swelling, then pull out the first cloth and apply another linen cloth soaked in ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling disappears; then heal it until it heals.
If there is a flow of pus, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the flow of pus which are either distillation methods.
of the wood from paper
This is a remedy that comes on paper for the eyes when they are moist and dry; you must stretch them with tweezers and scissors, and then press them with a spatula from their roots; then put vitriol powder on it.
And if it does not work, you should cauterize it with the subtle cautery of the lens and then cauterize after incision; many times they heal, but nothing stays from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hailstone
Many times in paper, there come things that appear like hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason, the disease is called "hail", and it consists of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the treatment is as follows: keep watch to see if the hail becomes quiet from both sides, and it is a light thing to know; then make an incision on it, next, peel off each part gently, then take the forceps and crush it. If you cannot cover it without puncturing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient at all; if the tear is large, gather it together with stitches, and cure it until it heals; if it is small, do not apply force, for oil will restore it soon enough.
And if the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and grab the hail with forceps, crush and press it from both sides; if the paper is moved by the incision, do not worry; when the hail is crushed, apply salted oil and cure the wound of the one who has swelling until the patient heals.
of the fat of the hairs
Exinach is a grease that is infused into cloth made of paper above, and it happens more in children than in adults, and it greatly affects their eyes, and they come down with catarrh at mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hurry to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces immediately, sleep above them, and their papers are damp under their eyelids that the exinach spreads and covers its appearance in oil. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of work is that the patient places his head in your hand; and then take one cloth made of linen, and arrange a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then put it over [the eye]; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is collected within the circle; then make a small incision in the moist area with a sharp spatula, but not larger than the wound you would make when opening a vein; and cut the skin completely until you see the exinach; and in multiple positions, the exinach comes from the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.
Then hold the cloth tightly between your hands and turn your hand to both sides until it is spread out; and ensure that you do not damage the incision, that you do not reach the oil with the spatula, or that you do not cut it.
And if the incision does not open at the start of the cut, raise a little the incision lightly until it appears; then pull it out as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place them on top, and hold with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind seeds and place them on top to destroy the moisture that remains. Then heal it until it is healed. If an abscess becomes hot at the location, cure it with plasters cooling it down until it is healed.
hair of the papyrus (meaning: plants or fibers resembling hair)
When paper lice are born with hair other than nature's, and they are raised, they harm the eyes, and bring on kinds of diseases such as habitual weeping and swelling of the paper lice and albugine, all due to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure them: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicinal heat as mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterization, or by incision and stitching, or by caustic substances, as I shall explain.
You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper lice from the oil onto your left hand; if it changes color, that is good; if not, push a needle through one filament of it; and remove the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow from those hairs, taking one filament across the whole paper, and shave it; then make an incision in the part beneath the paper, under the hairs adjacent, covering the whole spatula, from the large tear to the small one; then pull one filament, and place a small tent of cloth and linen under the paper, then mark on the paper a hook-like figure, like a mirte berry, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity with which you intend to lift the paper as previously designated for all.
If you need to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make an incision across all the lines you have marked, starting from the large tear to the small one; and it should be one of the slits near the natural hairs at the root of a radish, then insert the onion in one of the two angles of the cut, then peel it entirely; then close the two lips together with a stitch using one thread of fine linen, and squeeze out the blood, and make adhesive the excess filaments on the scissors with any sticky substance, if you choose to do so; if not, do not bother with it, then leave the stitch and the threads for 2-4 days; then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, because the paper heals at the edges of the wound and by its assembly, but the stitch is soaked (as the ancients say), and it is work done without fear.
And if in another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure similar to the fennel stalk, as we have mentioned, divided into three sections according to the following form:
then cut that which stands above the small sections equally according to the following form:
And if you do not have the ability to hold the pliers and the figure is not equal, take a needle with one thread, and put it into the figure; and place another thread through the large hole, and another through the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your hands; then raise your hand equally, and remove all the skin on which you have marked, as we have mentioned, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar calming ointments.
And sometimes the hair of the paper turns: you should use what we have said about incision; but stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of canines is as follows: you should fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, and then make two canines by hand, and two thin stitches equally long as the paper and the width of the spatula; take the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads; then carefully assemble the one above the other on top of the paper covered with oil, and bind the two canines of the two parts together; leave it for some days, and the skin that is tightened will rot and die, leaving a hole through which pus can escape.
If it takes too long or if you need to force it, then cure it until it heals; when the wound is closed and the paper can be removed and no longer pricks the hairs; this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The tasks are such that you take a fine needle, and tie a thin silk thread to it; then assemble the bones carefully and join them delicately, and make sure the lengths of the threads form a palm's length; then prepare another thin silk thread briefly, tie its ends together; then place the patient's head in your hand; expose the work area to sunlight so that the task is clear, for it is a subtle and delicate procedure; then push the needle into the hole where the hair is alongside, and make it pierce through the skin hastily but not through the natural skin; then pull out the hair up to the assembly, and push the pulled-out hair into the assembly, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then pull your hand until the hairs come out entirely with the natural skin.
If the bones are treated and the hairs do not come out with them, you will pull out the bone with the thread that you have prepared, until the bone emerges from the wound and can be seen through the oil; then pull out both the bone and the thread, close the wound and leave it for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh heals; if the hairs are small, take a long hair from the head naturally and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated and then cut it.
of the purulence of oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or porriture comes in the oil, it occurs in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It happens suddenly through a wound, cut, or cauterization, or similar things.
The method of work is that you cut the suture, separate the lips of it, and put inside linen bandages, and let it stay until it heals; and it should not be used in its treatment with things that dry up and constrict. For if you do this, the disease worsens more than before; but work with things softening, such as fenugreek; and a poultice of warm or hot water and flaxseed oil should be prepared, and immediately apply it to one side, and treat it in this way.
And the secret of your cure is that you must not suture it in its previous form; and this work that we have mentioned is not far from correcting this disease, so that it does not return to its previous form.
Of the flesh that comes into the oil
This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and tears and cauterizations and similar things; and the process of work in it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and pierce the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear to the right one, so that the threads come out in two heads of the flesh; then put the flesh on top of the whole needle, and cut with a spatula as wide as a thumb.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts within the paper; and may the heads of the two incisions be at the four angles of the incision that you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has the name "J Grecque"; then remove that flesh, according to the thickness that its sides are pointed below it, next to the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure it with the medicines mentioned above for softening, and ointments, until it heals.
And if the sickness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make a clean incision under the hair on the paper, as described above; then squeeze between the two leaves of a glove, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in form; and wise masters prepare all kinds of devices with every possible means to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are needed in various positions.
under the skin of the paper
When this type of suture occurs in a man's hand in such a manner that the paper above is sewn with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must press the tip of a razor blade beneath the paper and lift it up; hold it with pliers until you extract the substance from the spatumile (a thin, delicate instrument), which should not be too sharp or too jagged, so that the patient does not suffer from the overly sharp spatumile that might hurt the oil; and make your incision, from which you remove the assembled tissue, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural form. The entire assembly is then healed, and sometimes in the oil it becomes infected, with acid and pus; then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put wool moistened abundantly with egg on top of the oil. After three days use colloids and healing substances until it is healed.
Of the nail of the eye
The nail has two kinds: one is nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, and another that is not nerve-like but resembles white congealed moisture; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot move; and both look like they are beginning towards the great lachrymal, and grow little by little until it covers the entire eye and all the light and movement of the oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take a piece of paper in your hand, then pick up the nail with tweezers of small double curvature, and place it above; then take a needle, and put one horse hair or cow hair and strong thread; bend the point of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and pierce through the entire needle, and tie the nail with thread and place it above, and scrape all the hair from the side of the nail that follows the lid and the sinew to the hair until the root of the lachrymal, then scrape the remainder in the root of the lachrymal with a subtle spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural tear duct or lachrymal intact; and sometimes the nail is placed on the eyelid only, and at the end, as we have said; then scrape off all the spatumile from which this shape is formed:
And keep the spatula not to touch the skin tissue and break it, and that the pruning iron is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little bit of crushed egg yolk, and from collyrium made of litargyre, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerve-filled, and you cannot push a needle, and the unguis can't enter, many times this appearance of nail is treated with medicine; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take the spatula lightly sharp according to this form:
And remove the nail gently, and if you see that it does not thin out at all and the reason is pressing on it, distill from your mouth into the oil of collyrium made of litargyre and red collyrium and crushed egg yolk, and stop the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same process, until it is completely removed.
If nothing opposes you in the oil, like an abscess heals, then milk it, and first heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the wound deteriorates in oil due to great harm, then suspend it at the onion, and cut a part of it but not all, so that tears do not come; then distill red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
of the flesh that grows above the pupil
The first hairs of some men sometimes grow red and cover the eyelid, sticking to the paper and turning towards the outside like a rosebud on a balsam plant; and this condition is such that the patient places their head on your hand, then you open the eyes, and if all the hair is suitable for it, hold it with force; then cut the first red growth, and continue cutting until smooth to the end, taking care not to injure the eye during the procedure; and make the incision with a spatula as described in the treatment of the nail and the small forces used to remove the scrotum, according to the form demonstrated after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the hair is removed, apply oil of linseed or you break and distill red oil, or medicines corrosive, and place the oil outside, with egg white soaked cotton to ensure that it stays hot; and if anything remains, and the wound becomes cold, and you doubt it's hot, leave the oil and cure the wound with cooling agents for reducing heat; then return to your work when the wound is healed, and do this for each hair treated in this way.
But it is necessary that you dilute the treatment of each oil with natural oil and an accidental way with iron work, and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is strong enough to bear this procedure.
The veins of the eyes
These are the red veins that are covered over the oil and carry out their work and weaken the oil all day long. Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine if the oil, in which these veins are, is normal, and if there is no other disease but the oil; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then gently press those veins throughout their entire length according to your wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle double, as follows:
And let there be two degrees of pressure in one stroke according to this form:
Then gather the veins delicately and squeeze out the blood hour after hour until you see them move away from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the spatula, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you don't cool the veins; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red oil, it will correct those who are clotted.
If you cannot collect all of it in that hour, make a poultice with soothing things on the oil to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and the abscess is certain to heal, then continue according to this method as before until it heals; and this is the form of cauterization:
of the oil duct
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not cured, there is a defect in it that you should incise above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then repair it with all the instruments mentioned here; it is called "rough head", and it should be made like a new head, pointed like a limestone as shown in the following figure:
And place the corrupt bone on its base, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is crushed; do this once, then restore the location of medicinal extracts.
If the joint is welded together and pus forms, if the body of the bone is welded together and remains thus for 40 days without healing or becoming abscessed, and no bad accident occurs (knowing that it is healthy); but if not, there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to the pit of the newborn according to this form: and you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines hot, and when it is uncovered, take .1 foret according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft be attenuated up to the tip as you see here.
Then put it on the bone of the elbow and move your hand away from the oil by one inch, then turn the iron completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the veins if he holds his hand above his newborn; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the pus dries and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the newborn; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the flow of oil
When the eyes are widely open and do not close of their own accord, you should hold the patient down; then clean them, apply mustard or honey without piercing, then put oil (made of acacia and aloe, incense, and sarcolocola) on it, and hold the oil in place with bandages and cloths. The type of cloth to use is such that you take soft cloth, fold each one into four, and place one on top of the other according to the amount required by the eyes; then hold them together with a firm bandage, and continue applying mustard or honey without piercing; then remove the mustard or honey and leave the oil in place for a day and night; if the oil becomes soft, you should tighten it more; then remove the oil after a day and night, and if you see the eyes healing, that's good; if not, continue applying the oil and cloths and the bandage until they are healed.
The open wound of the eye does not heal on its own.
When disruptions come in the cloudy eye, it becomes like grains of resin and is visible to see; then if you see it covered, the remedy is as follows: take an awl and insert it into the root of the affected part up until where you want it to stop, then insert another awl or thread doubled at the tear duct; and make it pierce, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then tie a piece of thread around the eye socket and tighten it, then remove the awl and put oil-soaked linen on it; leave it until the filaments grow with the eye, cure the oil with soothing things until the wound heals; sometimes the wound is held in place by the eye itself with a circular piece of cloth around it until it heals.
And if the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a thin spatula coming from pure oil, clear the pus, and close it up immediately; then draw it out when it is healed.
with a thin spatula coming from pure oil
This illness called "alcunnati" is not far from a bowel that has been assembled in oil, appearing like an ulcer draining pus, but it is not an ulcer; and the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit on a chair with his legs apart and feet flat on the ground. Then take the head between your two hands, move it as much as you see the bowel come towards the eyes; then insert it, and do not drain nor expose the light, let the patient see things as he is accustomed to; and if the draining of the bowel does not appear, know that it is an ulcer, and if the draining of the bowel has not been prepared as we have said. place the patient between your hands, then take a thin spatula and press it on the cornea-covered cloth .i. inch along the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal cloth and the cornea, until the bowel emerges; and when it has emerged, let it distill into hot boiling oil mixed with honey or fenugreek oil and honey, then let it be cured with another cure until it is healed.
The sharp points of oil
We have the resemblance of sharp points in the division and what is necessary for piercing; if it works according to health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light due to the sun, and hold the oil tight and very firmly; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand (if the eyes are left-handed), the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand (if the eyes are right-handed); then place the tip of the instrument next to the crown by the thickness of a reed in that hollow of the oil at the lesser angle, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and hold your hand as long as it pierces through the hollow of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place; and the measure of the way almagda should be to the full of the measure of the space which is from the prunelle to the end of the black part; this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the waxed paper, then put the instrument up to it or where the sharp point is, then press down along another path. If the sharp point now comes out, the patient can see it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest and if the sharp point retreats along the second path, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not move, gently turn almagda around your hand bit by bit; then replace in trepanation a small amount of gemstone oil, and let it flow inside. Then place a stopper made of oil-soaked cloth or moistened linen on the trepanation hole, and seal it with holy oil. We and those of our time put on top a mixture with much egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, since there are some men who have excessively hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
Then perforate only the conjunctive and do not go too deep, but make it thin; then insert almagda as previously mentioned; and to complete the work, prepare a sleeper for the patient, in which he lies on his back in two layers; and be attentive to all movements; take light foods; and move neither head nor neck, and bind him according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then rebind him for seven days; and it is not advisable that you do this during the treatment or after the incision immediately, but it is advisable to alleviate it because the pain rises quickly.
If an abscess comes up, you should unbind the oil before the seventh day, and direct one who knows how to assuage abscesses; and when it is pacified, then unbind the eyes and place a small eye cup over them for any duration, and remain in that dark room. And gradually leave the house bit by bit, and convert yourself to your home; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that in his country, people do almagda piercing, which causes the water to come out, but I never saw anyone with it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they should be specifically:
And these are the characteristics of the heads of this same subtlety, and the rear parts in four corners sharp.
Of the flesh on the neck
At no time do various strange sores born on the neck arise, of which there are some that seem like scorpions with many prongs; and if such a sore is swollen in this way or it has a sore swollen in another color, and if the sore is soft of bone color. In the case of those sores that are soft but not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, pour vinegar on these sores, and pull them out; then hold what you can with a thin sharp spatula until you know that this sore is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be held, you must cut it all off with delicate instruments gently, so that nothing remains; and if without being cauterized or bandaged, the abscess bursts, the remedy is as necessary; and if these are malicious abscesses, you should hurry and burn them with cautery until the pus is drained and all the sores are removed, then pour oil of roses or vinegar on the wound.
1. If the patient does not work, moisture approaches up to the palace (palace = head), and you should know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as required, you should know that there is pus in the bone above, so the instrument does not come for cutting: then you must put a string of flax (flax = lin) about half an inch thick and white into his nose, with a space of less than one finger between each knot; and insert the patient's head through the string in its nostril to the deepest part of his mouth; and do this several times as children in school often do, and it is easy for whoever wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and be familiar with one after another while we are who are holding the string. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted the pus, then pull out the flax, squeeze the blood, and moisten the flax in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for 3 days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything remaining of the pus; and then put a reed (reed = plonc) in his nose for some days until he is healthy, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as it is called when oil and medicines are distilled in the head.
And it is made of silver or brass, resembling a lamp with an open neck, like a cane, and lead it in the same way; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the pus in the nose
Many times, a disease called "telul" arises in the head of the neck and grows larger and larger until it can be seen with the eye; therefore, you should cut it at the beginning, and boil it completely, then put the cautery or burning medicine on it; and if it is delayed to be cut when it is large, take care if it is hard, of a reddish color, and has poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enlarged abscess, for when it is cut once, much harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft-touched and not of reddish color, you can cover it completely; empty the patient and cut cautiously, cure the area with drying and constricting substances.
when the neck is cut and sewn up
When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilage joints, it benefits little, except in some men. Therefore, if this happens to anyone, you should check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together in a stitch, heal it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from both sides, you must cut all the skin on their edges as much as they bleed, then join the two lips together in a stitch, tighten, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood sandalwood, and incense crushed; and put some plaster of strong or other plaster over it, and let it remain until it dries up, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the stitching is such that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the abdomen stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
about abscesses from lips
Within the lips there often arise hard abscesses, resembling grains of wheat, both small and large; then you must turn the lips, and cut above each tooth, and take it with forceps and crush it in each part; then apply the lee of vitriol ground, until the wound is cauterized; and then anoint the wound with oil of asafetida, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Of the flesh of the jaws
Often a swelling arises on the jaws, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold it with tongs and cut it at its root, leaving the wound open; then apply vitriol powder or other drying and constricting powders to it; if the swelling returns after incision, which often happens, cauterize it again; it will not return after cauterization; and these are the shapes of the instruments for cauterizing.
Of the sores
Sometimes there are ulcers in the roots of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and harsh; sometimes the teeth become black and yellowish and decaying, when corruption comes to the gum, and they stink; you must have the patient sit on your lap, with his head in your hands, and remove the sores or the decayed teeth as far as possible; then clean the blackness and greenness, and the yellowish and other impurities until they are purified; if you remove that which is at the root, it is good; if not, start again on the second or third day, until everything is cleaned; know that teeth have different shapes of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work shows, because the person who cleans the teeth has other shapes than the one who cleans between the teeth; and these shapes and others are provided with you.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay the drawing for as long as possible, for this should not be done at all; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to shave it off. Adonques quant li malades est contraints du tirer, il faut que tu sois certains de la dente douillante. Maintes fois desoit le dolor le malade, et croit qu'elle soit ou dente sainte, et fait tirer la bonne dent; mais toutefois ne se départit pas le dolor par ceux, tant que le mauvais reste, car nous l'avons déjà vu faire à ces saints; et quand tu es bien certains de la dente douillante, il faut que tu escorches entour la dent à tout endroit. Mespule fort pour protéger la gencive de toutes parties; puis le mouvez à tes doigts ou aux tenailles subtiles au premier coup et coup par coup, tant qu'il soit bien éclochiés, puis y afferme bien les tenailles; et soit les chefs du malade dans ton saint entre tes genoux, et le tien bien si que il ne se mouve.
After pulling the tooth out straight to break it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and push it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before. And if the tooth is pierced and chewed, it is necessary to fill it with bandages where the holes are; and hold it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled out; and it must be worked very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful that you do not break it [the dislocated joint], and leave a part remaining, and return pain to the patient by the malice of the root, causing them greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not act as ignorant lords who, through their haste and bravery, sometimes break the chariot [bone] and do not bring about what we have stated; but they often cause this great disease due to the roots that remain, or because of the chariot that they break, as we have often seen; and when the teeth are separated, wash the area with wine or vinegar and oil; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize [the wound].
The shapes of the forceps, which first silence the teeth, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you separate the tooth; these are the shapes:
And should be large enough so that they do not bend when separating, and should be made of good iron, and serrated for holding onto the teeth.
From the root of the teeth If the root remains exposed when pulling, you must put moistened soft cotton on it for 1 day or 2 until the gum is softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," so that the teeth seem like a beak of a plier; and inside them should be made as if a chisel and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, you must uncover the entire cheek around the root and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as plier, of which this is the form:
And it should be large and thick so as not to break, and if the root jumps out through them, that is good; if it does not, help with all tools, from which the shapes come later.
And help with this tool having two prongs, of which this shape comes from it:
And other iron objects that are in front of the teeth roots, and with this tool resembling large pliers, from which this shape comes:
And this instrument must not be able to break, and know that many dense instruments are; and likewise other instruments, which are not counted; and wise masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the sickness require, for there are various diseases in which the ancients did not teach an instrument; and if it breaks the chariot or other bones, which it should not, then seek the instruments that are required, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which this is the form: And be thick and firm to hold the bone so that it does not slip away but can be held and removed; and then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, use the entire instrument for that purpose:
When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and are misshapen, especially in young women, you must know if the root is not near the tooth, and it is not in its proper position, and it cannot be straightened or filed. In that case, extract the tooth; and if it is erupted with the tooth, take the instrument as shown in the figure below, which resembles a small beak, and is made of sharp iron at the end:
And the tooth, little by little in many days, due to hardness of the dentin, and because you cannot move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small steel file as shown below in form.
and is similar to the file used for making needles; and with the file, file the tooth little by little in many days lightly, so that it does not move until it becomes smooth; then flatten it at the end with any smoother, and if the dent is too sharp and it bites the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth fall out
When the teeth are dislocated, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew due to pain and they vomit, you treat them with constricting medicines but it is not effective; then they must be restrained with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never does; and let the thread be medium size neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you observe the teeth, take the thread and put it between two healthy teeth on both sides, as many as there are, one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering up to the part where you started, and hold your hand skillfully and carefully, so that it does not move; and let your knot be at the tooth root so that it cannot escape. Then tie the teeth with the thread using pliers, and assemble them, and place them back between the healthy tooth, and make sure it does not injure the tongue; then leave it tightened as much as it can stay, and if it dislocates or the threads break, tighten another one; if it remains and serves for a long time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the guidance of the two healthy and two misaligned teeth, as you see.
And when the teeth fall out and are put back in place repeatedly as we have said, let no one intervene who is not skilled and patient; and sometimes they make the shape of a tooth of cattle bone, and place it at the location where it is missing, and tie it in place as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
1. Sometimes this ligament comes below the tongue naturally, and it is born in such a way; or due to accidental wound healing; and the treatment is as follows: you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head still, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is suddenly of a wound, you press the uncine and cut wide the ligamented part; and make sure that the incision is not too deep, because an artery is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the swollen and inflamed area with warm rose water and salt water, or cold water, then put a flax tent under the tongue; and tie the patient's tongue each night so the swelling cannot spread. And if discharge of blood comes, you put vitriol powder on it; and if the wound does not heal, you cauterize it with the slow cautery, which is good for this. Then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if you see it of a small, black or hard color that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is declining towards blenchor, and there is moisture, pour vitriol powder on it until it burns, then return to your work until you drain everything; then lift up the swollen and inflamed area with warm salt water, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of throat abscesses
At times, boils called "godath" come inside the throat. These are properly called the two almonds. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard, small abscess of dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of blood flow; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it, or it would burst by itself; and if it is white in color, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check whether the abscess's heat has subsided and been calmed. Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open his mouth and take the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue underneath the entire instrument, which is its shape; it can be made of silver or fine brass as well as a small knife:
Press the tongue with the entire instrument and see the abscess. Take the awl and pierce it into the almond, pulling it out farther than you can; take nothing from the cloths with you, then cover it with the instrument, which resembles a cork; even if the head is bent, one end to another, and are very sharp, made of iron or copper:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the base with pliers, here is its shape:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the base with pliers, here is its shape: (continued)
I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside the throat, to be precise, one small abscess; and I had her throat tightly closed, so the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passageway, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within a day or two. The abscesses were swollen so much that they filled two fingers through the nostrils. So, I pierced one of them immediately, pulled it out, and removed a large piece of pus; then I closed the other nostril, opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the probe into these abscesses, cut a part of them, and did not let any pus out except a small amount; and thus the passageway in the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water first and then wine, and she continued to cut the abscess for a long time; the abscesses kept growing back, filling up the space I had vacated, until it became very large; at that point, I tricked it by inserting probes deeper into her throat and cauterized it within her throat. In this way, the abscess stopped growing, and I left those parts alone, and God did with them what He wished after me.
of the eye
When the eye swells and elongates, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is swollen large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are eased, and it is thin, you must cut it; and the one that is rounded and assembled but not long; and it is blood-colored or of dark color or black, you must make an incision in it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as I have said, according to its thickness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then insert the probe into the eye, pull it out, and cut it at .i. of 2 punctures that I have said in the incision of 2 almonds. And you must not cut more than the superfluity beyond the natural limit; for if you do so, it hurts the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we have said in the incision of 2 almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient is afraid of being cut, you must use an instrument for cauterization to reduce fear. And the method of cauterization is hot. And it is that the patient places his head on your lap, and then presses his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and touch it with hot coals, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this shape:
And have a lock of hair or ointment container that the medicament is put into, like a spoonful of cuillier, and place the instrument full of medicine onto the eye; and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine inside, not to the throat and the nose; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it onto the eye until you see that it is swollen and the irritation caused by the medicine has subsided; then take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and push the instrument filled with cotton into the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye; do this repeatedly until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you have to start the cauterization again, repeat it, and after the cauterization, clean the area around the eye with a mixture of cotton in butter, and wash what is around the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and treat with gargarismes until it is healed.
This cure is more effective through fumigation rather than cauterization; if it is treated by this method, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and fennel or similar herbs, place them all together in one pot, and add water; boil the mixture; let the pot be well sealed with strong clay; and have one instrument with hairs inside the pot as follows: And let it be made of silver or copper, and let one of the eyes be pushed into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane while the eye is being mortified; after this process continues until the eye dries up, but ensure that you do not begin this procedure at the beginning of an abscess boil, as many things may happen; and never perform this unless in the decline of the abscess boil. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place a chicken egg crack inside the patient's head so that the mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is good treatment along with salvation.
Often a fish bone or other sharp object lodges in the throat, so you must draw out what you can see and press the tongue against the instrument until you see movement in the object; if it does not open and remains lodged in the throat, make the patient vomit before the food is fully cooked in the stomach; by chance, the object may be expelled through vomiting. Or, the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or a small piece of dry bread; tie one thread to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the location, it will adhere, and then you draw it out; if it does not come out as mentioned above, take a splint-shaped instrument as follows:
And bend the instrument into a curve towards the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head high; beware not to touch the epiglottis, let the patient put the instrument in, because he must move or the matter is worsened; if he pushes it down, or draws it out completely, keep the instrument equal until it is out.
the saliva of the throat
Sometimes the saliva is used as medicine, as I have said in the division, for curing medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, because you press the tongue on the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the saliva, take a small pair of scissors or delicate pliers that are suitable for this purpose. If that is not effective, then take a threaded needle, and put it in the patient's throat, and insert the tip of the needle with hot iron at its end repeatedly. And anoint the patient with cold water throughout the day. Then take a full ounce of cold water, open the mouth, pour it into the mouth without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the saliva feels the cold water, it will spill out.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then subdue the patient with astringent [medicine], in the instrument that I have mentioned for the astringent treatment of the eye; do this many times, because it will require more persistence. The manner of the astringent treatment is that you take one pot or one with charcoal, and cover it with a perforated cloth, and place the head of the instrument in it; then pour your astringent, and the patient puts the chief of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that no smoke escapes, but comes only to the nostrils; and the nose will require persistence, and if it does not fall, continue the astringent treatment many times; allow the patient to suffer thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and drink nothing of water; then it will be necessary for it to come out by this governance.
The form of the instrument for treating the nose is such that, when it can be seen, resembles curved tweezers to enter the throat; and it should resemble a syringe nozzle, and have an abrasive tip made of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; here is the form:
The chapters on abscesses
Many things resembling an abscess are mentioned hereafter in this book according to what memory recalls from one and another, and they are diverse in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that the first resembles [the other], and of these, one is in its similarity and due to moisture. And the second manner is concerning joints situated on the body. For abscesses of the head are different than those from the foundation, and abscesses of the charnut joint are different from those that come at jointures, and each should have its judgment in the work.
And if it is not necessary to perforate abscesses while the boil has yet matured according to its completion; and for those that must be perforated when they have become hard, and do not die according to their maturity, such as abscesses that are near joints. For when an abscess comes near a joint, and it is left until it bursts, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint become rotten, which causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the main member, and you delay the perforation until it has matured, it will harm the main member; or if it is near the foundation, if it is perforated before it has matured; it must not be perforated without the abscess having completed its digestion, except for those that are near the foundation, which could not be penetrated and become long inside, and a fistula forms; and it cannot heal in a long term.
And you should know the time for perforating an abscess that has matured according to its completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the fever subsides, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the swelling and shrinkage of the abscess's head, and other signs; and you should make the perforation where it depends less on the abscess, and where it has opened up; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places or where there is no pus.
In those who are swollen, it should be aligned according to the affected limb. And when an abscess is in a charred area, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, the body will flow out of the opening, and it will be full of foul matter; and there may be hardening of the wound edges and its deepening. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limbs require. And you should apply small incisions, small openings; and large abscesses, large openings, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cover with care, and dress; when it has become as thin as cloth, and softened, it is necessary to do as with babies: and for those that are cut into four angles, and for those from which one cuts like the leaves of myrtle, like abscesses in the joints; and for those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar dressings.
If there is no head (i.e., if the abscess is superficial), it should be pierced completely; and when the abscess is large, and has accumulated a great amount of pus, you should pierce it, but not draw out all the pus at that time, but only a part of it; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing incorrectly; do this repeatedly, gradually, until the pus is completely drawn out. This applies to patients who are weak, women, children or old people. The body may sometimes jump with the release of the pus, which might cause the death of the patient, and you should be careful about that. Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it should be stuffed in each one with linen or old cotton; and for a large abscess, where there are many cuts, you must pack in cotton or wool of flax without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove it, and heal with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and wine, and wet a cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.  And if the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book should be used on the affected area; and if it is winter, or the wound or abscess is very nervous, then you must apply heated and wet cloths (tents and drapes) to it.  And if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, then you must apply cold and wet cloths, or cold and frozen cloths, for up to three days as we have said; and then drain the abscess, lance it, and treat it until it heals completely.
And you should know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
boils
1. For small abscesses that come in the head, our methods are as if in cloths, just like a bladder of a grape, and there are many similarities. There are some fat ones with moisture, as well as some hard and stone-like ones without doubt that the arteries do not oppose. And concerning the procedure of the abdomen, you must try it out on every instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which this form follows, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, they cut above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, they peel off skin that contains that moisture, for it returns again when nothing is left; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; otherwise in water and oil, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and let it rest overnight. And replace the cotton the second day, as before, on the third day, until you know that it does not remain overnight; then cure the wound with ointment appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one notch of fat, cut it along this form, long; and pour your eyes into it, and peel off skin from all sides, and apply your entire care to drain the pus where it lies; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I told you before. And similarly do for a hard or stone-like abscess, and treat and cure as I have told you.
And the cutting on a hard abscess and the moist one is easier, because they contain little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head have no moisture, and from those was the abscess that I cut on an old woman's head; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone core, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had pierced it with anything, one would have made as much of a wound as a stone. In other abscesses coming from heads, especially those that come from children's heads and roots of the ears, they should always be opened for as long as possible, because pus comes out; and they should be cured as needed.
of scrofula
Often this abscess appears at the neck, under the ears, and in the groin, and sometimes it appears in other parts of the body, and they are large and swollen. Each scrofula is located within its coat, as the nodes of the neck and head described earlier; and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not want to obey health. In that case, when you see it in good condition for incision, resembling the color of the body, silent on all sides and not pressed against the neck artery or vein, and not deep; then you must cut over it, scrape each part, and place two incisions with the knife, if necessary, as described in abscesses of the head; and draw it out bit by bit, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and the spatula should not be too sharp or cutting, that the hand does not slip, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not let you pass over, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are appeased and the wound is softened and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, return to your work; then ask your assistant if there remain any small scrofulas, if they cut them and clean them. And if there is a large root of the scrofula in the vein, it is not necessary that you cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang down without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure it.
And if you scrape the entire scrofula (boil), it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, for there will be no superfluous delay due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it (the boil) and draw pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas with superfluidity, pierce where the opening is already wide; and pierce in the same way as the one mentioned earlier, by depending on it, then introduce lancets with ointment and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an enchanting ointment until it heals.
If the scrotum becomes inflamed and swollen, apply a poultice to it made from crushed barley, wine, and oil. Repeat this process daily for three days.
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the shape of the throat, but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the slit in the throat called "epiglote" be opened; and no aid should be given by these, because all the veins and the parotid gland of the sick are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in 2 mandibles. When the sickness is in the channel of the parotid gland, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the strangulation that comes from the swelling.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglotte, it is necessary that we make the incision below four circles or three small incisions through the transverse, between the four circles or by the amount of the incision of the siphac, not in the cartilage.
And if the joint is difficult to cut through at the incision of the epiglottis, there is no cartilage, and the veins are long in that place.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat all along, then cuts open the windpipe until he reaches the trachea; and avoids the veins of blood, if you see anything, and then severs the thyroid gland as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by cutting open the windpipe that if it jumps out through the broken place, and by the lack of voice;
And let the wound remain open for a while.
And when the hour has passed where there is doubt of strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and stitch it up entirely to touch the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing until it becomes healthy.
Albucasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the flight has fled. Then you cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, and it is thus preserved from death.
And thus the ancients commanded to leave the wound open as long as the illness is passed, and it is passed in 3 or 4 days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it when it is healed;
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden take one knife, and she stabbed it in her throat, and cut part of the channel of the windpipe;
and I was summoned to heal her, and found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood coming out of it, and knew that she had not breathed or spoken except through her throat, and the wind was flowing through the wound.
I quickly sewed up the wound, and cured it until it healed;
And no harm came to the maiden except her voice became red, and she returned afterwards to her position.
Therefore I say that in the condition of epiglottis one should not be afraid.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia" and is a large abscess of a bluish color, and it occurs mainly in women.
And it is according to two kinds: natural and accidental; where natural has no machine.
And the accidental is according to two kinds, of which one resembles fatness in us, and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from us through artery. and there is fear, and it should not be done forcefully except in the small one, and prove and examine it all through the opening. if you prove it like a small swelling and it cannot spread to any vein, then crush it as we crush the nose, and pull off all its skin, if there is any. And treat carefully, and heal as necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
from us (we)
Many ways of ours there are, which I will say all the similarities;
And now I must say all the difference between knot and dislocation.
Dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the boil has passed and the purulence is complete; then the fever rests and the heat subsides.
With a knot there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains one sack, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like an abscess, and grows large.
And they are of two kinds, either fatty or moist, and many of them are of such a color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the nose, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments called "entromissoire", according to their shape and the chapter that follows.
The manner of inquiry about abscesses is that you take or the more moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then straighten the joint, and take care not to let it dislocate again.
If moisture corrupts the wound, make it as I have said for other abscesses;
And if after straightening the joint there is no moisture, know that it is fat. Then make a cross-shaped incision and take pincers, and gently peel off the skin on both sides, keeping the coat intact so you can pull it out safely.
If you cannot draw it out whole, draw it out piece by piece so that there is nothing left.
For if something remains, it will return many times.
And if there is a little left and it does not bother you, fill the wound with some corrosive powder, bind the wound, apply something soothing to the abscess, and treat it with other cures until it heals.
If the wound is large, cut it with two lips and treat it with skin from a pig or other animal.
And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is contrary to you and you hasten and apply the vitriol powder, let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound heals, and allow the boil of blood to subside; then return to cover what remains unhealed.
Here are the forms of intersecting instruments, and they are in four kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses with fistula.
and they are like needles used to sew sacks, and are made of citron cane, or iron, or silver, and the yellow ones have more value, and are more skilled at encircling the boils with fistula.
And there are three types: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the wound's width.
The forms of the tumors are similar to each other as you can see here: great, medium, and small; and if there are tumors with two bumps in four ways also.
and if there are tumors with four bumps, they are also of four kinds; and if there are tumors with two bumps, there are those with only one bump and they are also of four kinds; and all of these are necessary in their place.
The head of such creatures is sharp, and those who do not cut it cleanly from one side only are prone to error, because one must scrape the nails there so as not to hit the vein or nerve.
And of these incisions [or wounds], the bandages are applied to the wounds, so that the patient does not injure himself at the opening of abscesses.
And they have three types: large, small, and medium-sized, as you can see.
And one should not use it [the cautery] except in the charnu [charred or burnt] places, such as limbs, arms, breasts, and similar places.
Occasionally, one makes another small instrument resembling fists of bandages, shaped like this, for draining blood:
And one applies it [the cautery] sometimes to the place that is healthy to close veins and arteries, and sometimes in this large shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to corrupt, until they resemble breasts of a woman;
and remain swollen and ugly, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to be according to this form of the line b. up to .g.: then scrape the fat, and apply the wound with medicine containing charcoal, then close the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed;
and if the breast slopes downwards and is deformed due to its size like women, they should be divided into two halves, by two similar cuts; The first part of the line, "de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre," translates to: "so that one is holding the other at the end of one and the other, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g." Then, the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and bring what we have said of stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healthy.
and if it is not healthy or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. And let it heal while it consumes the remaining meat and fat, then cure it until it heals.
From abscesses in the buttocks
These abscesses coming from under the buttocks are managed as hard scrofulas where they contain moisture.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G: And when the entire hole that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and anoint it afterwards until it heals completely.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula (scrofula is a chronic disease that causes swelling of the lymph nodes), then make an incision as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound opens up, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
The severing of an artery.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it becomes sutured, there are often abscesses, and the same happens at an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if it is known in this way because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. And if you feel it with your fingers, it is felt tightly; and if it is for the vein, then it is round and appears prominent.
It is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the eyes and at the angles and near the neck and in other places, and it is very large. Therefore, the iron cautery treatment should be avoided, and the same applies to those with swelling of the arteries on the head. Make a long incision in their skin above the skin.
Therefore, the iron cautery treatment should be avoided, and the same applies to those with swelling of the arteries on the head. Make a long incision in their skin above the skin. Then open the incision with scissors, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons until it is exposed.
Then insert an awl underneath [the dislocated joint], and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie a double thread around the artery for two fingers' breadth, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then insert the space between the two joints with an instrument until the swelling inside it disappears and the abscess is opened;
Then apply the remedy with a boil lance until the joint cries out; Then treat this one with ointment following this, as long as it is healthy;
and if the abscess is due to the opening of the vein, then you should paint your hand with this that you can from the abscess all over the skin; then push the needle underneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have it one double thread so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of two parts to each of the two corners with thread;
and if you doubt that the thread does not pass through, insert another needle under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four inches;
then compress the abscess until the superfluidity enters it, then compress the superfluidity of the pus and leave that which is connected;
then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then provide remedies of tentoriums and poultices until it is healed;
Of abscesses from nerves
As abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come on nerves when wounded, or from too much labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulder and wrist, and in all joints where there are joints, and it is a grave abscess, its color resembles that of the body, and it feels pain in many positions.
and when it is pressed hard, the patient feels pain, but it is not fully in the body, but under the skin.
And it must be held completely still from all sides, neither forward nor backward, not above nor below, and the one in the joints should not be covered by iron; for by chance it might contract.
And if it is the head or the forehead, make the skin with a spoon. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike at its root;
If it is large, suspend it by the onion, peel it, then open and sew up the wound until it heals.
Hanging large lumps Sometimes there occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called 'fungus' because of its resemblance to toads, and it has thin roots and large heads; and in it there are small and very large ones;
I saw one man who had two bellies that were more like toads than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were split open, and ran with moisture constantly.
I found and weighed them in one at 16 ounces, and in the other 7 pounds, and their work in incision indicates that you should look to see if the patient is moist; and the color of the arterial blood is white and moist with a subtle root.
If the copah is wide and the fire cautery is present with you, for in cutting there are often too large discharges of blood, and if it flows without your notice, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take a thread well made, bind the arterial blood as we have said, and leave it for 2 days;
and then hold it (the affected body part), and do not stop squeezing the thread of plunger until it cuts off the artery, and feels resistance; and if the roots are thick, one may fear to cut through it directly due to the abdomen, but you can certainly cut through half of it.
Then cauterize it so it does not grow back; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cut the thread that is of a dark color, poor sensation, and milky appearance.
For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to treat the scrofula hereafter.
When the belly is filled [with something]
If the appearance of the belly comes from a cautery of a wound or a tear in the liver, and it is above the abdomen and contains some of the bulges, as happens in other cases, or blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or wind;
If it is due to the rupture of the liver and the release from the bowel, its color resembles the color of the body, it is light without pain, and has an opening with various outlets. And if it is due to the rupture of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when you press it with your hands, it returns, and then it comes back, and by chance if it is sutured, it greatly enlarges at the opening of the wound and due to great labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is easy, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a certain quantity.
and if it is due to wind-inflammation, it is sensitive to touch, and the operations are that you examine whether its appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or wind-inflammation. It is necessary to let the treatment be. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you must command the patient to strain their anus, stretch themselves out straight, and then press all around the belly. then command him to press gently between your hands, Then go around the joint that you have signed with all the splint. Then place half of the abscess above to all the large spoon-shaped scoop.
then open half of the stretched abscess on the thread, and put your thumb in it, and push the intestine. If you find it taken by a splinter, remove it, and push the intestines out through the opening of the abdomen;
And if you find the boil, take hold of it at its base, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery or vein is obstructed, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two threads into them, and place the needles around what you have made in a cross shape that you make puncture;
then press the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can be pierced, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or you strike it when it is soft and pliable, then treat the wound as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said;
or you strike it when it is soft and pliable, then treat the wound as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said; draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and heal the wound.
the boil
We have mentioned in the division the resemblances of chancre, and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid using iron cure; and we say that chancre begins in marriage, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a chancre is in a place where it can be shaved like a chancre that is on breasts, thighs, or similar places, and must be completely removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, it should not be approached, for I have never seen anyone heal one; no one has ever healed one before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is to purge the patient once with black bile; then let him purge if there is obvious repletion, then cut the patient into one good length for the operation; then shave your claws or chancre and all the hair from all parts, and remove everything that feels nothing from all parts; let the blood flow freely, and be careful of the wound to your hand or anything, and if the discharge of blood makes you opposed to the incision of an artery or a vein, then cauterize until the blood is coagulated; then heal with another cure until it heals.
dropisy We have already said in the division the likenesses of edema, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: only this [edema] should be treated with iron; one must not touch iron in these two likenesses: namely tympanites and yposarche, because it is a deadly thing. When you treat this edema likeness called "edema of the ear" with medicines, and the cure does not help, then observe if the patient is weak or if he has another disease besides edema, such as dropsy of the belly and similar things; do not touch iron, because there is doubt. But if you see the patient strong and without any other disease except edema alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must act thus: Place the patient upright on your hands, and have the minister press the belly towards the lower part of the buttocks, then take the pointed spatula according to this form: And it should be sharpened on two sides. But do not make it so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it cannot bleed.
then observe if the edema is connected to the intestines: in that case, you must make an incision below the buttock 4 fingers right of the anus; and if it is due to liver disease, make the incision on the left side 4 fingers below the navel; and if it is due to the swelling, make it on the right side, and do not allow the patient to lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not run to the weak place.
Then pierce the entire hide with the instrument, and push it, and place your hand all around the spatula between the skin and the gristle as when peeling an apple of the appropriate size or within; then pierce the gristle until the spatula comes to the right spot, which is the tip of the bone; then pull it and place the instrument in its form: It resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of iron or light steel, and has a small hole on one side. On one side, there are three holes; on two sides, two; and one on another; and the head is shaped like a feather quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve pens:
At the top above is the artery, so that when the instrument comes to the bone, move the instrument now on top of it. Empty then either half or one-third because if you look at more than what is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will fall unconscious, or approach death.
but empty according to its potency, and according to the conditions of the patient's vitality and his pulse; then pull the instrument and hold the artery, which is now held for the caution that stops the holes in the gristle, as I have spoken about, so you pierce it in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and take out a small amount of artery.
Do this every day, and be careful not to overdo bathing until it doesn't persist but only a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave him much water, treat with sepulchral earth or hot sand, and by sweating or bath, and expose to sun, and anoint with vinegar; and treat with medicines that dry until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
For stopping the penis Never are born children who do not have foreskins in the penis, or whose foreskin is small or not in its place. If it should be necessary that it be pierced immediately with a very thin spatula according to this form: then put a thin piece of cloth over the foreskin, and tie and hold it for 2 to 4 days until he wants to urinate, and then remove the cloth, and make him urinate, and then replace the cloth; and accidentally it should not be necessary because the urine that comes out does not leave the cloth closed. He who has a small perforation is to be treated with the plunger of cloth, as we have said, it will widen. He who does not yet have a perforation in its place are blocked, for no one is born who has the perforation at the tip of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and cannot ejaculate due to the material not being able to reach the marris, and it is an evil disease.
And the manner of work is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the tip of the penis and the base as thick as a pen's feather, so that the perforation remains in place as needed; and beware of the flow of blood which comes frequently, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the injured area, and treat the wound until it heals.
boils on the penis Many times this albate comes in the penis, and it is an appearance of hideous disease; there are both malicious and non-malicious [forms]. You must take them one by one with subtle care, crush and cleanse all of them, then put cotton wool in Egyptian ointment on top, then cure it with fine ointment until it heals. If the albate is malicious, of a putrid color and swollen, you must apply cautery. When you have crushed it, if the albate is within the penis and has both skin and skin outside, you must first remove the albate that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the outside. For if you cure them together, there is no assurance that the parts of the penis will not be perforated, and blackness and corruption come into the penis and elsewhere; in this case, you must clean everything that is black and corrupted, then lie ointment made from pomegranate rind and honey on top, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
If there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery as follows: The cauteries should aid in two dispositions simultaneously: namely, the bleeding and corruption; if the parts of the penis are corrupted and shrunken, you must lead or induce urine from the penis and make the patient urinate; when the skin is loosened at the tip of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you must shave the area with a sharp instrument, until the ligaments are released, and release the parts of the penis from all sides;
And if it is a serious matter to speak of this, then you must lance it with a single spatula, slightly deeper than half the thickness of the rod and skin; then press gently between two fingers, and put a thin piece of damp, cold linen cloth on it, so that it does not immediately heal.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not like other wounds in that it does not have a constant healing process; nonetheless, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on infants, it is necessary for us to make the best and easiest work for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen most of the masters and healers performing circumcision around one day, using forceps and a new scalpel; however, it was difficult because there were two layers, and sometimes they would cut the wrong one and leave the other below.
Or the wound is covered, and there is double pain, and during the cleaning of the tip of the member, the point is not always certain; and during the cleaning of the nail, by accident the iron slips, spoiling the work, and many times it becomes necessary to clean it without need and I have seen this.
From the amputation which is done to all the chains of thread I have found the goodness of experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut equally all the time; but that the threads be well tightened around the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not bind the thread only around the rod, but allow him to enjoy in every way that you can. then let the child's hand be between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the rod and blow or cut, and draw it up until the joint of the rod is even; then clean it well from the dirt that has assembled there, then tie the marked point with a double thread, then bind each finger to another thread; and hold it two fingers apart by the second binding and cut the knuckle as close as possible and pull the head of the rod.
then let the child's hand be between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the rod and blow or cut, and draw it up until the joint of the rod is even; then clean it well from the dirt that has assembled there, then tie the marked point with a double thread, then bind each finger to another thread; and hold it two fingers apart by the second binding and cut the knuckle as close as possible and pull the head of the rod. Then let the pus flow drop by drop, for it is purifying; sprinkle powder on top and on the powder put a cloth soaked in egg yolk cooked in rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil, and leave it like that until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
The form of the strength for the healing is this: the two shoulders should be tender and sharp, and the shoulders equally as large as the hand.
The error in the healing is when the marrow inside is at the incision; therefore, you must stretch it to your fingernail so that the wound becomes an abscess; and equalize it, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then take pliers and then press.
And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the scrotum swells, leave it until the abscesses have been calmed and the scrotum is lightly opened; cut it as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the scrotum, this will not harm it.
Then treat the affected area with healing powder as we have said in treating powders, and if you cut too deeply, it will go beyond its bounds, but it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, or blood congealed, or pus, or frozen urine, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see the retention due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient bend over their knees; and they should put their feet on the back, and extend their abdomen from above the lower back, and hold the patient straight as much as possible; then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, so that the urine is released.
If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the equipment called "siringue", of which this is its form: it should be made of subtle silver, light and slender like a bird's feather; and the cannula should be one and a half palms long and delicate at the tip.
And the method of the discharge of urine is that you take one double thread, tie one end of it to the tip of a piece of linen or cotton, and push the tip of the thread into the syringe; and plug the surplus of the linen and push it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on one stool, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the anus; then insert the syringe forward up to the bladder, and have the patient feel it come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide leading where it goes is twisted; then the thread is pulled out little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then pull it out forcefully, and correct the urine.
and continue the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient feels relieved.
Diseases of the bladder
When scratches or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and its shape is:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the channels lead so that the medicine can reach the penis without addition, if we can draw out moisture, and push when necessary.
And when you see to throw your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the goat in the moisture, and draw it along with what is inside; if you draw out the moisture from the goat, and then push hard on the drawing, it will enter the goat, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient can feel it.
This is the form of the subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: here it is:
This is the form of the subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: it is made of silver or copper, and its head is higher; beneath it are one finger or links. Then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see for cleansing the bladder. Tie it between two fingers with strong twine. Heat one piece of that moisture on fire. Place the head of the enema in the penis, then hold your hand under the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread in the holes, then assemble the circle like one would close a bag, and put within it oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone (arrowhead or projectile)
We have said in the division the ways of stones (arrows or projectiles), and their extraction along with medicines; and I have told the difference between an embedded stone in the body, and all its signs, and when to operate on a stone according to its size; and regarding the bladder, and the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder, resembling a jump in its subtlety; it opens the kidneys, and irritates the patient's penis, and it pains him many times, and then swells; and many foundations come from these jumps; and children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very painful in old age, and it is a medium-sized illness to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and tilt them upside down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and rises slightly towards the top; then make him sit between your hands arranged below, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards; then press and touch it with your hand.
If you feel the stone in the cavity, hasten now to cut into the stone above it. And if it does not fall by touching all around it, moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or use your thumb, if the patient is an adult; and push it onto its foundation, seek for the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, pull it out by the neck of the bladder; then press down on it, and push it towards where you wish to cut.
Instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upward, and to remove the skin that is below the testicles in the area where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, so it takes this shape:
And it is made between the one that is between the coccyx and the base, not in the middle but at the side of the lower back on the left side; and it should be straight above the bone, and your hands should be adjacent or at the base, and the incision should be wide enough for passage, but narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
By chance the hands pressing on the base (the hands) may jump due to effort; and be aware that there is such a stone or angle; it is necessary to press hard so that the dislocation emerges easily. And if there is such a one who is soft, resembling a plum, round, from which the dislocation emerges lightly.
Therefore where there is an angle and edge, make the incision larger; and if it does not dislocate, you must pull up on the pliers that are shaped like a chisel at the tip to force the stone to move so that it does not escape; or you put under it the small curved instrument called the clavis; and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, widen one hole with a drill and then remove the bone without cutting it.
And if there is more than one arrow, push the largest one first into the bladder, then strike it, draw it out, and pull out the smaller ones afterwards. If it is very large, it must be cut open to make a larger wound. For the patient, two things happen: either he dies, or urine comes out immediately because the wounds cannot close; but still try to extract or break apart with pliers as much as possible while you pull it apart in pieces;
When you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, tightening it, and place one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine or in oil and cold rose water on top, to cool down the abscess; then raise the patient's head and do not loosen the rope until the third day.
And when you loosen the rope, wash the wound well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diaphinecon and basilicon until it heals.
And if abscesses boils come in the wound and corrosions, and if blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained because of this, which is known in such a way that without jumping with urine: therefore, press your hand in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will rot and burst.
Lift the wound from pus and inflammation and cleanliness, and assist in every way that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you bind them with two bandages, and gather the medicines on top of the place.
And if the stone is small and it is guided by the penis and pierced through, and urine cannot come out; you should treat it as I have said earlier, that you cut many times, and there is an excuse for cutting because of this cure. I have already proved it in such a way.
Take one iron rod of this shape and sharpened at four angles on one tip:
Then insert the iron rod through the urinary channel under the stone so that it cannot return into the bladder; then gently push the rod into the stone; and turn the rod in the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on the part of the stone that is inside the canal. Soon it will be broken, and it will jump out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then insert one cord under the stone and another above, then make the canal towards the stone between the two ligaments, then pull it out, and cut the ligament, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healthy.
From a woman's stone (or pelvis)
It is rarely that a stone (or pelvis) becomes pregnant in women, and if it ever happens, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that it cannot be found a woman well-informed who exposes herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply placed than the stone of the man, therefore it requires a deeper incision, and great fear it causes.
And if you need this, it is necessary that you take a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate in any case to take a gentlewoman experienced in the art of women; and present to her a wise woman alive or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the incision of the stone.
and carefully check if the woman is a virgin; then you must insert your finger or base and seek the stone; and if you find it, hold it under your finger, and recommend that she push with her hand or on the patient, and squeeze and press her left hand onto the bladder.
If you find it, she must move it little by little from the bladder opening towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the root; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh in the area where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and cut it off at the first small piece.
Then insert the hand into the lower abdomen, if you feel the stone, press the wound so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, sharp or smooth, long or round, and with grooves. Know their appearances to determine the outcome.
And if the bone protrudes, set it in place with powdered vitriol and hold for an hour until the bone is cauterized; then return to your work, until the pain subsides, and have tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone for assistance in your work.
If the bone protrudes, and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and hold with tourniquets and bandages, and do not continue to press it, and leave the stone alone and do not draw it, for there is a chance that the patient may die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has been relieved and the wounds have healed, then return to your work until the pain subsides.
Of fleshy hernia
A watery hernia is nothing but a collection of moisture or white matter, which is under the skin near the testicles, containing an egg; and it is called "white matter", and sometimes it properly belongs within the lining of the eggshell, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the leather of the scrotum between the white matter we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
And the cause of this watery hernia is weakness that comes to the testicles, and the matter spreads out.
And sometimes there comes a blow to the temples, and this moisture can have many colors: either it turns pale yellow, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white like we have said, it is an abscess, that is, long like an egg, and does not open the temples, because it has moisture all around.
and if there is moisture in the very cloth (tissue), it is an abscess with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the hide of the kidneys and the white meat, one feels it well; therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly with a probe, so that its shape becomes clear as mentioned before. Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that follows.
Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that follows. And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be purged to our ability and the fullness of his body; then lie him down on his back, on something slightly elevated, and place many blankets under him.
Then it is on its left side, instruct the minister to be on its right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the shoulder;
Then take the spatula, strike the cartilage of the shoulder along its length until it is separated from the tip, and let your incision be straight in cutting the cartilage as far as the white part, and remove the cartilage carefully according to your power.
Then pierce the cartilage straight through with one large hole and drain all the water. Then place your fingers, and lift the cartilage upwards. Do not touch the shoulder, but only the cartilage. Strike the rib of it carefully, if you do not strike it skillfully, the water will return;
And if the egg (or yolk) jumps out of your work, reset it to its place when you have completed the operation with the syringe; then sew together the two sides of the joint with a suture, then heal it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the egg (or yolk) is corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you bind the vessels which are suspended, taking care of the outflow of blood; then cut the joint to its entire length, extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts together, know that they are branches; then cut the other part equally as you did the first, draw out the blood, and put dampened flax soaked in rose oil into the wound.
And put other damp wool soaked in wine and oil on it, and put two pieces [of cloth] on top, and cover with double layers of fabric, and tie all around with the string as shown in this form:
Then take two pieces of fabric, make them into bands of damp woolen cloth according to this shape and assemble them on the thigh area, with one piece covering from the base to the back, and the other at the shaft area; and the two ends should be gathered in the belt loop of the braces.
And sometimes this ramie is used as a fire cautery, the size of an iron blade, and you should take one thin cauterizing knife, cut through the skin at the joints, and heat it as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the fluid is exposed.
If one takes the fire cautery in this manner, and pierces it through to the bone, and burns it with this subtle cauterizing iron:
And hold it in all ways that you can, as long as it is heated up completely; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg (yolk); and know that this work is more effective; and be careful of bleeding, and make sure the incisions are made in order.
And if anything happens against it (the cautery), or an abscess bursts or bleeding occurs or something else, then treat what has happened against it as was said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work due to its horribleness, you bring about perforation as I tell you; and it is when you are completely sure by the signs we have mentioned that you pierce the place where the water [collected] is located.
Make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part, as wide as the spatula, and make the perforation long along the body; and let the wounds be wide, so that all the pus flows out.
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the rest of the pus flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed.
If the white cloth does not allow the fluid to flow from the wound's mouth, you must insert a reed or instrument used to treat fluid from abscesses, as described earlier; then enlarge one finger width the wound, ensure that the fluid returns, and it will heal within 5 to 7 months. Once healed, the patient will recover his days.
of the abscess in the thighs
Ensure that in the section of this rule, there is fear in various situations, so it seems that one should leave it [the abscess];
And I will tell you the work and resemblance of an abscess.
Then many abscesses come from bodies, and especially from the kidneys; and this is often the case.
This is known to be due to an excess of sour and acid fluid, which spreads to the kidneys, or by impact;
The color of an abscess corresponds to the color of the body; it does not feel pain, but is a severe abscess.
And by chance, there is an abscess hard and rough, of such color, and sometimes comes from an artery, or the swelling of a vein.
When it is from an artery, it can be known by the location of the abscess hot, when you press it with your fingers. and you should not touch it at all.
A person afflicted with swelling of the vein is known by his disposition to the manifestation of the touch of fingers.
and can easily perform the incision on this resemblance, and on other sores. And it is that you cut the core of the boil, then the egg is raised high, and the white streak flows out from the bottom of the boil, and deliver the suspensorium of all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already soft with these newborn sores, then it is necessary to draw out the egg, and cut.
And if it [the dislocation] is in the breast or within the chest, you must deliver all that cavity and crush it firmly.
And if the navel is located behind the back, you must crush everything and extract the afterbirth as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with damp linen in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
of an abscess in the cheeks
this is an abscess covered by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of cheeks, and when the patient goes, they go quietly.
and the treatment of this disease is equally dangerous as described earlier.
and nevertheless we shall tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the suspension device for the eyes below his feet.   (The suspension device is probably for keeping the eyes open during treatment.) stretch out all the vessels that are close to the vein and bind them with the master's thread,   (The "master's thread" is probably the surgeon's or doctor's string used to tie off blood vessels during surgery.)
Then apply a sharp spatula wide through the hole where the vessels are exposed, until they are exposed.
and then scrape from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temple;
then insert an awl with one double thread and tie it to the first place where the blood has come out, and tie it again at the other end; Then press the knee straight, in accordance with the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture.
Then dress the wound as one would an arrow-shot, so that no pus leaks from either side.
because in this way there is no ill coming, and if all the pus comes out from one side, you must draw out both sides. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of pus, and dry up and cannot heal themselves.
of the breaking of the nose the consequences of this incision are caused by the opening or breaking of the nose, or the extension on the belly in the area of the inguinal region, due to which the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the openings.
and this rupture is either due to breaking or extension, and these two methods of causing pain come from different sources: either from impact, jump, fall, or lifting a heavy object with a wrong posture, and similar things.
and the signs that this is due to extension of the nose are that it happens gradually, over a long time, and not suddenly. And the abscesses are equal towards the full, because the pus follows the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the surgical incision, which makes sudden pain appear at the beginning, and the abscesses are various appearing under the skin close to it, and this is due to the release of the intestines and the body's reaction to the surgery.
Sometimes the intestines come out of the circle and are retained, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, therefore it is advisable to escape.
And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestines with their hand inside in the wound, if they can reach it. then place him on his neck, between your hands, and lift his legs.
then extend the belly upward, and strike the whole hide of the flanks with long strokes. Then push the blunt irons of the belt buckle, according to what you need for opening the wound, and they should be such that the eyes can come out.
Then scourge the sores that are underneath the skin of the genitals, as long as the white sores are hard and exposed on all sides.
Then push your index finger into the genitals, between the first white sore that is underneath the skin of the egg and the second white sore.
and remove what is behind the egg, and between the second white sore; and then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and bring the first white sore up to your left hand, and lift the egg towards the abdomen with all the white sore. And command the minister to stretch the arm upwards, and undo the one that is in front behind the elbow.
And if there is any intestine wrapped around the bone or hard white matter found, and if you discover anything of this kind, push it into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the kidneys; after the loin, then cut the joints that appear from the threads, until there are four threads left. Then gather the joints together in a cross-like manner and tie the syfac (the displaced tissue or organ) that we have mentioned is below the skin of the kidneys, with a strong thread of two parts. Then wrap the shoulders in cloth, and tie them with strips of fabric so that no vassals who nurse it can enter, unless an abscess cloth comes. and make the knot according to the first knot long with two folds of that one, and after these two knots leave a space of about one finger's width under the keyhole for air to pass through.
and afterwards in the round shape that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the eye, as much as to corne it but not to break it, as we said before.
Then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on wounds, and bring the ligament as we have said. And sometimes the white parts as we have said are cauterized after incision, due to fear of blood flow.
For this happens often, and leave the ligament until it falls off by itself; if it does not fall off, heat with hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls off.
Then cure the wound with another remedy, until it is healed perfectly.
Of fleshy hernia
In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like a ramik who is assembled with the bladder, in this way that you tie the vessels after the incision lightly below.
Then press it in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who open it, until the vessels stop flowing; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there comes rot in the groin, as we have said, and it opens the joints; and no internal organs are sent to the anus, and if any are sent, it is little, and it should be repaired every hour;
Furthermore, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or phlegm grows, as long as internal organs are sent out;
This occurs by the extension of phlegm in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflamed the joints and opened;
And the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then strike the area of the swelling inflamed with a flatiron of three fingers width;
and pull out the pus that is under the skin which is swollen, then take the iron and place it on the apparent surface of the pus;
and press the flatiron to the full depth of the abdomen, then cut the two apparent surfaces of the pus on top of the iron, and cut both;
Then straighten the head (neck) and do not cover it with a cloth or extend the eye nor anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the ramie for the intestines.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you bandage the threads, if it becomes infected and treats the wound until it heals.
The cloth is compressed, without appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are more effective in this place and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin on the buttocks
Many times the skin on the buttocks softens in some men, because the charms inside are softened and visible; and when one sees it is necessary to make the patient lie down on his back, and to strike the softened skin with the natural skin; then bring together two lips at a stitch, and if you see, sew the excess of the softened skin at 3 or 4 stitches firmly; then strike between the stitches, and the cure as with other wounds, until it heals, and close the hole with thread.
the punishment
1. Know that castrations are discussed in our law, and I do not wish to speak about it in this book; and it is not necessary but for two reasons: the first is that men in castration should respond when asked, and know the cure; and the second, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, swine, and other animals. I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the genitals become softened; then grasp them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two types: one type is like the figure of a woman between the two genitals, having hair and sometimes urinating in court; and another type is in women who have something above the penis as a rod and two genitals. And the treatment for both men and women is to cut the scrotum together and treat them like other wounds; however, there is no cure for men whose urine squirts through the skin of the genitals.
Of the tenor (modern English)
The swelling (tumor) is a growth attached to the natural part, as long as it is ugly to see; and some women have such large ones as big as a hand, and that is the case. You must dye the superfluous part of the tumor with your hand or onions, and lightly cut it off; and do not go too deep, so bleeding does not occur, then treat it with another cure until it is healed; and at another char (growth) that grows in the mouth of a woman, and it bursts out, and perhaps jumps away, and has the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they are called the "cow disease" by the ancients. If you must cut it off as we have said for the tumor, and treat it until it is healed.
The erratic growth is a hardened or stone-like tumor on the surface of the body; and it is called "erratic" because it cannot be removed by simple cutting. When this kind of swelling arises in the body, it should be cut open with a knife until it is completely severed from its base; then take a hot iron or an emetic and cauterize (sear) the wound, so that the bad humors do not remain there and cause more pain.
1. The erratic is when the nature of a woman is not perceived or is small; it can be natural at birth or accidental due to disease; it can be caused by the child being malpositioned, or from a subtle or large cephalic presentation, and it occurs fully in the womb, on the side, or underneath, or wherever it may be. They should be conceived and delivered, and the flowers should grow; this is recognized by observing the swelling of the belly. If the swelling appears near the hands or the navel, then hasten, and proceed as follows: place your two hands together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread out; then form the two hands, until the subtle cephalic presentation becomes round, and press the swelling; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the spot, and let the woman rest every day so that it does not heal. And if the cephalic presentation is hard and large, you must cut it with a spatula resembling the leaf of myrtle. If the swelling is of the afterbirth, suspend it at the navel and cut; have ready medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg; then bring a large bandage, so that the wound does not heal; and in this way, it should be kept open, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure other wounds until it is healed. And when in the womb, char nee appears, it must be covered as described above, unless it is an abscess enlarged. For the abscess enlarged that is in the womb, one should not try to touch or treat.
1. Hemorrhoids
1. Emorroydes are openings of veins that usually do not require treatment, and when emorroydes become old, they become threaded; and as we have said in the division, the resemblances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that respond to cure. I say that emorroides and threaded ones, when they are fully grown in the womb, and they cannot be felt, can only be cured with iron. Those that are at the mouth of the womb, can be felt, are those that can be cured. Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then remove the threaded one with tongs by its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine over it to stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the opening for an hour, then immerse it in cold water; and if bleeding persists, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark and grape seeds and wild gale and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one plaster on her back. If it bleeds, that is good. If not, make fumigating bags for the back and breasts without cutting; then take linen, wet it in plantain or marigold juice with old wine, and apply it to the place. And when the abscess settles, cure the place with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a small hard lump, so it must be covered as I have said for threaded ones; and then cure it until it heals.
abscesses in the womb
Many forms of abscess come in the womb, such as boils, inflamed abscesses, herpes, fistulas, emorroides, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the womb, which is not one of those that are covered with skin; and if you want to know about ironwork, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and turns red if it can be seen. Do not hasten to pierce it immediately, but let it heal until the pain subsides; then have the patient lie on one seat, and provide two small seats for him to lean against, supporting his back and spreading his legs apart; and his thighs should be spread out, and place his arms under his thighs, and tie them well with a strong rope; then bring the cow's udder towards the right side of the abdomen, and provide the tool used to open the womb, from which comes the shape; and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you pierce the uterus first to know its depth, so that what enters inside of the instrument does not go too deep, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the uterus with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it must be placed on top, and marked. And when the abscess opens, and it becomes soft in the hand, it must be covered with a bandage, at the head, a linen cloth; and when the boil is empty, you must place clean lint soaked in rose oil or dry green oil in the wound; and place the lint on top of the abscess and on top of the handle with clean linen dipped in water or cooked herbs such as calendula and aristolochia. Then leave it for two days to heal with ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes the womb and the wound are lifted by enemas of water and honey, and then water or long-rooted plants such as calendula and aristolochia that have been cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound returns in the womb, you must guard against ironwork, but cure it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth and the signs when she sees the woman dilate downwards and desires to smell the anus: then hasten the infant to come out; thus, you understand that this childbirth occurs according to its natural form, and it is born through its head, and the afterbirth follows with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's abdomen so that the infant comes quickly, for when it descends towards the head, it accompanies him, and the husband rids himself of his waste by good purification. And this does not come in any other way. Sometimes it comes through its feet, or the body or chest, or hands, or abdomen, or side, and is turned accidentally on its neck, and by other evil figures; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures in which one should assist.
If the infant comes out through its head naturally and the woman gives birth painfully with weakened vitality, she should be seated on a saddle or held by women, and anoint her private parts with oil or fenugreek cooked in oil; then the midwife shall insert the small spatula-like instrument shown here: 1. And cut the afterbirth (secondine), and strike its heel so that the afterbirth which is inside comes out; and seize the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must foment the woman with musk-root of fenugreek oil; afterwards, make her take and vomit medicine (condisi), and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then bring forth the child.
The delivery of the child over its feet If the child comes out over its feet, you must push it upwards; And then turn the shoulder blade gently, little by little, until it is even.
Then take one piece and stretch the shoulder blade gently, little by little.
If it jumps up to the hips when commanded to grab, then make it vomit with a constriction. If it jumps forward, may God will it.
And if it [the dislocation] is not as we have said, turn it gently until it is according to the natural figure. Here comes the translation: Gently turn it.
And if it does not come as we have said, take musk of high quality and oil of sesame, and melted resin, and grind all in one mortar. and put this ointment on the woman's nature inside and around it. Make him sit upright in acute agony until below the ribs;
and when it becomes soft beneath (it), make one collyrium of myrrh, place it below, and leave it for an hour; Make him sit on a seat, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose, and press gently on the abdomen because the child is now leaping. From the birth of the child on its thighs When the infant comes in this form, place its hands gently in palms.
The newborn child coming out, one hand holds it from above. You must devise a way to return the hand: If it cannot be returned [to its place], then lift up the woman and go away.
If she cannot walk, then lay her on a bed with her legs apart.
Then administer the medicine I have mentioned.
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; Hold the child according to its natural shape, make it vomit, and command her to grasp it until the infant exits.
For the delivery of the child on its neck, have her spread her hands and turn her face towards the back of its mother. The bailiff must seize his hand, then gently pull it and deliver the child.
And when they are even, place the natural muscle relaxant of high altitude and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct them to move little by little.
And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to take hold of it; and make her vomit. In the same way, administer treatment to all those affected in turn.
In the same way, administer treatment to all those affected in turn. When it comes to treating them in this manner, grasp the affected area with your nail, until all moisture has been removed.
And if the child presses on its face and neck, it causes the bone to break, which is not held, and the child dies.
Push the child inside (into the womb), as much as you have it in the correct position, and command the woman to take herself once.
of the twins' birth Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not strange, and it happens frequently. Twins are sometimes born but they do not live, if I may name them.
I know they are multiplying, and are destroyed by the scythe which divides them, which is linked to filth.
And sometimes it happens as naturally as an animal giving birth, as we have said.
And if it comes out forcefully, then the treatment shall be as we have said, and let the physician be skilled, and do quickly and lightly whatever it requires. And do it in such a way that it is beneficial for healing. of many children  --> multiple children (in this context)
of many children  --> multiple children (in this context) Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the holy wisdom.
and it is necessary that the midwife knows this, because sometimes similar things happen. if it happens in this way, do as necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman in labor with a dead child or abdominal pain, as I said in the division, and it does not come out forcefully, and you are forced to work by hand. if you know that the woman is in good health and has no accident or fear of death;
The woman must lie on her back, with her hips inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
The midwife should shave the woman's private parts, or tie her to the bed so she is not treated in delivering the child.
Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oil mixed with myrrh and fennel seeds and flax seed oil, then anoint her hands with these oils and musks. Then insert them gently into the woman, then ask for one log of wood that will fit in the appropriate place,
And take care if the infant is prepared for surgery on its head; push needles into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides,
and if the dislocation is on the limbs, push or hammer them back into position at their midpoints;
and it is necessary that you grip the onyx with your right hand, and place the corbeure between its two ends with your left hand, and push it gently with all your hand, and pierce the onyx into one of the places that we have mentioned, until it comes to an empty thing.
then pierce it against another onyx, or use three if needed, so that the extraction is equal.
And then equalize it by moving from one side to the other to make it move, and hold the fingers together to keep them in place, as shown in the figure:
If part remains, apply oil to some of his fingers and push them into that part, and pull the other part.
If none remains, place this finger or higher and do so until it comes out entirely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to strain. Then you must fold over a cloth, until it's all covered.
then wrap the wound at the joint or at the heel, and in this way you must do for the other hand and feet.
And if the child's hips are large and narrow at birth or if it has a swollen head assembled. If you must insert a splinter-like spine between your teeth, and press down on it and draw out the pus. you grind it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
and in the same way, make it swell naturally if the anus becomes inflamed. then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head of it (shoulder) jumps out and is held with force, it should be split open, as far as the moisture that is further out.
If it cannot come out, strike it into pieces at the spot where you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture subsides.
And if the swelling is on top of the feet, the attraction is slight, and the reduction to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
And if it is strangulated in the belly or the groin, you must draw it out with a cloth wrap around your hand; and when the belly or the groin is swollen due to moisture, you should reduce the swelling;
and if another member is set (broken), and the joint remains; push the ball of your hand into the orifice of the anus, and draw it out until it reaches the mouth of the anus; Then insert a small or two, and draw it through [the affected area].
and if the mouth of the anus is narrowed due to abscess heat that has come, it is not necessary to work on it. instead, administer moist and fat substances; and apply poultices, and let them rest in warm soothing and moistening liquids.
And if the child is on his side, and you can make him straight, then administer what we have said in the live child.
And if one cannot make him straight, then pull him apart piece by piece and leave nothing of the spine.
Then when you have done this, administer what we have said in the plasters that come for marriage.
and if bleeding occurs, let it be stopped with strong compression, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb had killed an infant, then consulted another about it and revived the other infants. After a long time an abscess came to his armpit and swelled so much that it opened and started to burst.
I was called for the treatment, but I thought for a long time and could not heal the wound.
I put on strong plasters with great adhesion, and an bone came out, and after several days another one. I marvel much, because the belly has no bones.
It seemed to be the bones of a dead child.
I sought the wound and found many bones until the woman was in better condition; And the woman lived for a long time in this condition, and eventually regained a little strength.
And I have not remembered this chapter except for the reason that when masters find an unusual thing, they know what to do about it.
To bring back the dislocated shoulder to its place
Here follows the form of the pressor, with which one weighs books; and in two turnings are the heads of the two levers. The horns (or probes) should be more delicate than the restriction, and made of ivory or boxwood;
and the mouth of the rod (or probe) should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the tree (or handle) one finger, and its length half a palm; and within two fingers should be two equal lengths of this same rod, which are joined together at both ends, half a palm in length or slightly more.
and these two lengths are inserted into the mouth of the mallet to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, is to be made of ebony or boxwood, in the likeness of pincers. and have two arms, two pincers, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
and when you see opening the woman with all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, feet hanging down and legs apart. Then put the two shoulder pieces together in the socket, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between his thighs; Then work your hand over the entire instrument, just as you did with the tweezers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the socket, until the ball indicates what it wants.
This instrument is entirely sheathed and has multiple similar parts; and when the mirror reflects them, he works more quickly and higher for humans due to their size.
Do not hastily prepare the instrument without first arranging it, as its necessity is not easily excused.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her urine, and then make her vomit with disgusting substances, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. If she jumps because of it, that is well.
If it is not so, take a pot and make a syringe or cup, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, caraway, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cane or lid on the pot, and place the other end in the mouth of the patient.
and hold it until the vapors enter the patient's mouth; then make him vomit as we have said. If the second one jumps quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal as instructed, command the maidservant to wet her left hand in sesame oil or musk-scented water, then place it on it.
and let her search for it again; and when she has found it, grasp it gently and stretch it out little by little straight, so that the man does not feel pain during extraction. but you must move it gently from side to side and then pull; it will come out and dislocate again.
And if the mouth of the maw is opened wide, we have said the cure for emptying, and the fumigation of herbs.
and if it is not all that we have said, then ensure you do not draw it out.
but it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the maw, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then you cleanse it with ointment trifarmaçon.
if it will persist and return, and become feverish; but nevertheless, when it comes and causes bad smell in the stomach and head, it will hurt the sick person.
Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this purpose: no one of the ancients has proven fumigation with dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigating a woman to retain flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
And it is shaped like glass resembling a cane, and the narrow part is inserted into the body, and the wide parts are placed over the fire.
And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the tinea until it is destroyed, and begin another.
To drill the foundation.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation drilled, but it has been stopped up with a subtle syrup: Therefore, instruct the maidservant to pierce him with a lance at his due place, and not pierce him with a sharp spur, and guard the opening so that it is not touched.
Next put wool soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with an ointment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it does not recur, put or place a plum stone there, and leave it for many days, and it should be removed when the patient is seen to go to bed.
And sometimes this plugging of wounds or abscesses occurs; it is necessary to cover the wound in this way: if it heals, as we have said with a plum stone.
From the fistula base Fistulas that come from the base are nodules, and larger than those that come out of the side of the foundation, or in the space between two parts,
if there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodulation is old, it becomes inflamed, and moisture wakes up pus or thin boils,
And sometimes they are Persian fistula; and they are recognized by this, that there is either evacuation or windiness when the patient evacuates, and possibly it may jump out one side.
And if they penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach the junction of the thigh, and up to the nut of the calf.
And thus one recognizes the Persian fistula by its foundation, and not the non-Persian fistula: And you shall bite your tooth index or foundation, and insert a fine awl of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
If there is a twist, insert a thin splint or horse hair until you feel the splint or the hair at your tooth.
If you do not understand it and no blood, pus, wind, or urine comes out as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula penetrates up to the bladder or leads to the conduit of urine, if it shoots out urine and cannot be sealed with medicine.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the calf, then the tendon comes out to its place; if it is not twisted and there is no injury around the pain, then it remains thus, and no medicine or binding with ointment is of use.
And in these Persian bladders, there is no remedy but work, and the foolish doctors' vain attempts who involve themselves with it.
In that which is not Persian nor old, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the sick person lies between your hands on his back; and have the legs lifted up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the belly. Then push a tent of iron, or wood if there is a curvature, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must place your finger there.
If it is felt that the dislocation has penetrated through; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger or flesh, then you know that it is pierced. If one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
However, one can heal some, but it happens rarely.
And the help that one gives, it is heating the cautery subtle according to the width of the wound, as it has been said before; And push everything hot into the fistula until it comes out from the base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as you know that these charred pieces should be burned, which resemble a bird's quill.
Then cure the burn with damp cloths soaked in butter until the char is gone, then cure it with a healing ointment made of burning char and resin.
If it heals in this way, that is good. But if it cannot heal otherwise;   And to make sure that the wound does not become infected, apply some medicinal herbs and keep it covered with a dressing:   Et pour ce que le maulx ne soient a la grant plaie, mette de bonnes herbes medicinales et couvres le d’un emplastre.
And if it tries to enter [the wound], and does not pierce as far as the base which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent you place a thick covering of flesh or of syfac, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering is cut; If the tip of the fistula approaches and presses against the tent, and then the cautery is applied after that, until it reaches the top of the tent;
And the tent is released and it will tear; then take out those fatty tissues that seem like a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
And if the bone breaks through [the skin], and pierces you, either burn it with fire or apply a medicinal cure.
The fire cautery consists of two things: namely, the burning of these adjacent charred areas, and the stopping of blood flow and the drying of moisture.
Then apply the treatment for wet tents in butter or cooked cheese until the wound fills with pus and the charred areas are covered in it.
Then treat the wound with onions soaked in hard charcoal and dry medications.
When it is reset, it heals and does not dislocate again.
If a fistula comes up to the surface of the foundation and is separated from the body, push your thumb or the foundation into it and probe it.
If you feel a tumor, and there are two layers or the membrane or charms, where it is almost ready to pierce, but has no other way of healing or hope except by one of the three methods:
or you burn it as we have said, or you strike it to the bottom, or if possible you put pressure on it and treat it as first aid;
and do not go too deep, so you do not cover the holding element that supports the base, and let the evacuations come through voluntary sensation; then heal it, as we have said;
then heal it, as we have said; By chance it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut off at the base, either by force or by another tool specified. then fill in the cavity in the wound as much as you can.
Then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the area beyond the base: it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas of this kind: and it is when you press the edge of the fistula against the base of the skin above,   \] If one takes a tent peg pierced through the head according to this shape: And put .i. thread twisted in .ij., and push the tent peg through the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then pull out that thread, so that you push your finger or base to:
And draw out the head with thread, and join the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one day or two;
And do not tighten it at any time until the threads seize those things that are between them and they stick together;
Then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not open by itself, make it open in all possible ways as you can, if it is not too deep.
It is not advisable to cover a wound with a plaster while it is healing, as previously mentioned, until it is healed.
The shape of the pointed spinal splint used to make a fistula is very sharp at both ends and cuts. And on the other hand, it is not covered because one should not cover what one should not cover, as you see here:  (This suggests that covering a wound with a plaster should only be done when necessary)
Emorydes (emolients) are of two kinds: they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood. and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and away from the base of the foundation; but those that are away have little moisture.
and they have a yellowish tinge or a small amount of blood and are the color of the body.
and the cure for those that have them within the foundation is to instruct the patient to cough, so that the foundation loosens and the phlegm appears. If you hurry, you hold it with tongs or take hold of it with your nail, then strike at its roots;
and if they cannot hold it with their moisture, you take hold of it with cloth or gauze, or a piece of linen; and you pull them towards your fingers, then strike, and sprinkle some hot powders on top as a substitute for the cautery; or you cauterize them as said in the chapter of cautery, then you cure them with other treatments until they are healthy.
and if the foundation cannot come out, you clisterize the patient with biting and harsh clisteria to clean where the foundation is, so that it can come out openly.
if the patients prepare themselves and the threads are far from the foundation, then the cure is easy; And it is that you grab them with your nail or tweezers, strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healthy and fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you make the stitch in this way: take one twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is wide; draw the thread tightly, then knot the thread, remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, leaving one hole for drainage of excess blood.
Then place a soft cloth moistened in rose oil or turpentine on the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then leave it until it stops dripping, and when it is dry, treat it with ointment and other treatments until it heals.
With the drying of fevers or foundations   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "dou sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.) Often there is a drying of fevers in the intestines and due to natural constraint; and when the disease is old and medication has no effect.   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.)
It is necessary that you remove the bark of a splint or your fingernail from above, so that it does not become wet. then cure it until it becomes dry as required.
and if it cannot dry, then shave more strongly than before, as much as possible, and remove the bark. then let it heal completely.
The trembling / shuddering A formica is a small hollow place found between the body, and it travels deep inside;
And sometimes the shivering freezes the body, and it feels like death due to trembling, spreading throughout the entire body, more in the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a cane made from an ostrich feather or a strong goose quill and place it on the joint, until the purple circles encompass the joint all around; then turn your hand along the entire cane until you cover all around the joint and push it in, and harden the joint from its roots.
And if you see, do this with a cane made of iron or wood in the following shape, and be thin underneath and wide above:
Do not perforate, because one must hold the breath and press; if you wish to cauterize, then cauterize the trembling, as is described in the chapter on cautery.
of the shape of the clyster (enema)... Sometimes they make an enema of silver or arsenic, or melted beeswax or honey mixture; and sometimes they prepare small or large instruments according to those for whom they are prepared.
Therefore, it is applied in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they are small.
The form of the cluster is either small or large, where the belly is bound in this manner:
and it has an opening where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head should be pierced within; and on one side there are two holes, and in the other one.
And let the stomach or man put the medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes.
And between each hole, there should be space, then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted cord in 10 or more layers, and bind the stomach like a goat's pouch. and when the medicines are inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then cleanse (it); and this is the form of a circle.
And let the medicines not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the instrument with oil or egg yolk, or similar things, then insert it gently.
Then the ministers press the patient's two hands together while he is completely visible, then take out the plaster and wash the patient's legs to the public area.
And if the medication seems to be working, squeeze as much as possible; and if it swells up all night long, it will be a greater help.
And if you plaster the patient with a belly disease of discharge, and the medication begins to heal quickly, continue to treat it until he is well.
And if the hemorrhoids are ulcerated or abscessed, whether they be the suppository as well, it should be of such subtlety as for a child.
and this is the form of the suppository with which the skin should be tightened:
wounds  (plural of "plaie")
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you the treatments for hands and medicines, according to completion.  (The first two sentences are a summary of the previous section.)
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what kind they are made.
Wounds are made by the thrusting of a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or arrow or fist blow, or similar things.
According to the parts of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or chest, or stomach, or liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will start with simple wounds of the head, for it will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or abscess and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to arrow impact or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the healing of an abscess: if it makes pus from the head itself even though there is little blood from the wound, and the pus is on the contrary in the injured part;
and help the sick man to empty his body of wine and thick foods.
And if it doesn't want to heal, its flesh should be reduced, and it should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And put on the wound if an abscess has come, cotton soaked in rose oil or stiptic wine.
And if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, here I will say a little powder later.
and if the wounds have been moved by the wind, put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, as I will say about wounds in the abdomen, by suturing.
If the wound is open to the bone, gaping and not holding together, bind it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore tough skin in place of hide. And command the patient to eat coarse foods, such as boiled heads and cooked grain, like peas, and similar things.
And if you find or leather putrefaction not on the bone, cover it completely and throw boiling water on it, then heal it.
And if an artery is in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without surgery, cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if that does not help, cauterize it.
And if the wounds are small and simple, the healing is easy: it is that you put this powder that hardens as soon as the flesh has healed.
And the method of the powder is: take a part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; four parts of live coal, and grind the powder finely, apply the wound, squeeze it open, forming a hole, until it exhales well and unites with all its blood;
and then bind it well, leaving it to heal by itself if it does not swell; for the medicine is not withdrawn until it heals.
And at times this is done only with coal when neither incense nor dragon's blood is available, but the wound has not yet healed.
And if the sore has moved the wound, indeed it has, do not put this powder on it;
but apply some digestive ointments, or powder made of barley flour with water and honey, until it stops flowing. then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle tweezers.
And I will tell you afterwards about the breaks of the head (or skull).
About the wound of the neck (or throat)   (I am assuming that 'col' here means 'neck', but it could also mean 'throat'. The original French term is ambiguous in this context.)
If the wound comes or affects the neck and it is simple without any difference from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are cut.   (The original French term 'col' is ambiguous in this context, meaning either neck or throat.)
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than letting them heal on their own and not applying any restraints, for it harms the nerves and causes them to shrink.  (Assuming that 'col' means neck.) And place nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water washed in sweet oil, and boiled in sweet oil as well. And other similar stones in the same way, and always moisten them.
And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then heal it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce or incise them lower.
And if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, tie it off, cleanse it, and cauterize if necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or the vein is preserved, so that the meat goes:   ...(rest of line missing) If the heart is located above the throat, and it does not touch the throat but is placed according to its natural shape. Then allow it to progress and leave it for some days, then heal it with strong ointments until it heals.
If the wound presses into the bone, open it. and if there are broken bones, break them all if you can, and those that you cannot, leave until the wound heals. And let the dislocation be reduced and aligned.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said. If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, cure as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from spear or knife.   --> Of the spear or knife wound
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if bubbles rise from the wound; then know that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep and fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it immediately nor bind it for the blood that dissolves will not stay in place. return to the patient's heart, and open him up. But apply an attracting ointment, and let it rest for two hours each time.
And if you don't have an ointment, place a piece of dry cotton on the wound to draw out the moisture.
Make the patient sleep on the wound for two or three days, or more; If no spasm or bad tremor of the heart comes, nor any twitching of the entrails; And when you see the proper alignments, know that the wound is healed. Perform the cauteries and other treatments, until it is healthy;
And if it cannot be healed, and it opens again, know that there is a fistula; cure it as necessary.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple (single), or deeper, or on the back, then treat what is in front of it.
If it is large, sew (it); if it is small, powder (it), and if it is embedded in the bone, and has split into fragments, whether it is an open wound or not, pull out the pieces if they are dislodged. And if they are not dislodged, let the wound heal by itself, align the extractions (or treatments).
And for other wounds on other limbs, use similar judgments as we have said.
The dislocation of the abdomen
The dislocation of the abdomen is large, medium, and small.
From a large wound, the intestines sometimes protrude, or the intestinal nerves, due to which the insertion occurs.
and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one,
Because one sets more on points the intestines if not put in gradually. As they swell quickly when they feel the cold, they return more to the points.
and because it is better to treat a mid-sized wound, as one moves the intestines back to their place more than with other wounds.
And know that the opening of the abdomen has four ways:
The two common joints occur at the abdominal joint
and the joints of other wounds on the body, and two more specific joints are common for other wounds;
Furthermore, they are more appropriate with the abdominal joint, and I will explain one of them:
I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes, And great care is required when resetting [it], this is through one of the two ways: or through the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the internal organs are swollen from cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or a piece of fine linen cloth with cool water only. and you cook in boiling cypress and pine and spikewood. and open the intestine as long as the inflammation is removed;
and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is boiled to soften to reduce inflammation.
And when you see the swelling separate, if you moisten the intestines of cold or hot and ill-cooked water, for by this means the entrance is closed to almost nothing.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut with an instrument used for coping with hemorrhoids.
And the first remedy is to reduce the fracture but we should not cut it too much without necessity.
and this is the instrument to split it:
if it breaks through the neck and bends outward, then see its shape here:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst forth, then put it back in its natural shape at its proper place, if you have the power, for this is necessary.
When the wound is large and it is in the part beneath the abdomen, It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on their back. and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
And also if the hernia of the abdomen is in one of the two parts and you should know that the affected part should be higher than the other;
and in this way, you must apply what I say to both large and small wounds.
For small wounds, use the appropriate remedy;
Then have between your hands a compassionate minister who anoints the entire wound with his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common method of suturing,
and this is the common method of suturing, and you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, Then, leave some distance from the wound (i.e., thumb space), and insert an awl with one thick strong thread. and pierce the two skins with the two chisels of the spatula.
Then tie a double thread around the needle of .ij. parts, Then assemble the .ij. heads of the wound together.
and then leave .i. two inches of space, and insert another needle. Then tie the thread as you have done with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what you need for the needles, until all the wound is bound.
and let the needles be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick. Subtle needles pierce the entire flesh, while the too large ones cannot enter well. therefore they should be moderated.
and needles should not be pushed too far into the flesh and skin,
so that they do not pierce and open the wound before the seam.
And then press the shoulders with needles, so they do not prick the patient while sleeping. and place bands or cloths on the shoulders with needles to hold them in position. leave them until the wound is healed.
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For he inflicts a needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of flesh together with a needle that has one thick thread in the middle. and when you have sewn all four pieces together,
and when you have sewn all four pieces together, If you reinsert the needle at the part where you started, in the manner as we usually do with threads;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a small egg;
this stitching binds [the wound] together;
and I sewed a wound that a man had on his stomach,
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide (length), and the intestines were two palm widths long (length),
The wound was within the abdomen. I will return the intestines after they have been outside for 24 hours.
The wound was sewn shut for fifteen days, and healed, and became healthy.
And the monks had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
And do not heal it with ointment, for I am in one place where none is found, nor any medicine. And apply old cotton to the wound twice a day, and wash it with water of honey until it heals.
I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing:
Take the needle, and thrust it from the outside part up to within there.
when it has pierced the heart straight through, place the head of the splint or cost where you inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the other side of the inside out to the outside.
And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as pelters do fur. and that you leave once the seam of one side, and return it from the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen specifically calls,
as one does who assembles the two parts naturally together. And apply one of the heads of the lever to another head, in this manner:
thrust an awl or head of the mirror next to that place, and pierce it only there. leave the two heads of the lever; then turn the awl and pierce it from the outer side all the way to the inner part, 2 heads of the shinbone;
then pierce one and the other from the outer part to within, in 2 other shinbones that are on the opposite side;
and this is the muffled manner of stitching and the most common way.
Galen said this word, and no one can deny it;
One must sew the stomach with two needles, where there is thread on each.
and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite, in the manner of those who sew purses.
know that when the wound is within the stomach, and the stitching in this part of the stomach is more difficult than other parts of the stomach.
The judgments of the wound are as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the surgeon has moved it, if you replace the intestine, and its position; then place powder of arousing flesh on top.
if you replace the intestine, and its position; then place powder of arousing flesh on top. And if the arm has been moved, put some ointment on it until the wound heals; Pull out the thread and sew up the wound, and apply the marrow. Then heal the wound as with other cases, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicine, put on cotton wool immediately when it starts to heal; And move it two times a day as long as it heals.
For you have no need for any other medicine when the wounds are simple in many conditions.
and if you doubt that the wound is affecting the main limbs, You must soak linen lightly in warm oil or rose oil, And place it around the ankles, beneath the knees;
and if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, and this often happens, if the cleansing with black vinegar softens, and especially when putrefaction reaches the intestines;
and pierce through it, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine known as "jeun" cannot heal when it is punctured. and it is because of the inflammation in the veins that they are, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the herb jumps from the wound, place it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is fresh;
And if it becomes old or black, you must tie the part that is black so that blood does not come out from there. For there are veins and arteries;
then grip what is between the ribs. and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound toward the side to align the extraction when the arrowhead falls, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some people,
because I have seen that a man was wounded or stabbed with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, And it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and windiness from it.
I applied a remedy according to what I knew, and continued to refine it until he was healed, and the wounds closed up.
And when I saw the wound close, I feared that the patient had an illness in his abdomen. But he had no ill health, but improved in better condition, and diet and drinks.
And they said to any experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner: Take firm hold of large testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound. and when the testicles have opened their mouth, place it on the two lips.
then place another plier after it in this manner until the wound is completely closed.
and sew up the wound. If the head gets inflamed in the intestines, it causes no harm to the patient.
And it can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal.
in this manner: take the head of this thread made of intestine which is rather fine. then tie to the head of this thread (a) thin linen thread. Then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine, and straighten it in the incision;
and this method of stitching wounds is not beyond the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, without remedy or health, it can only be done with subtlety.
Of a fistula or when it is All wounds or abscesses, when they heal, are universally referred to as "fistulas". and likewise, when it is healed and bursts open again.
A fistula is according to the truth a hard and white nodule, where no pain is felt, And it is as hollow as a bird's feather;
Sometimes it jumps clearly upwards, and other times thickens; Sometimes narrow, and other times quite wide;
I have spoken of wounds in the division of injuries, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh; It is not by any of the eight causes: [This sentence doesn't have a subject or verb in Old French, so I couldn't translate it literally as it would be incorrect.]
it means by the smallness of blood or body: [This sentence is saying that something is caused by the smallness of either the body or the amount of blood.] In this case, the sentence seems to be stating that dislocation might be caused by a lack of blood or a small body. However, since we don't know what the "eight causes" are in the context of this text, we can't accurately translate this sentence without more information about those causes. or by its wickedness: [In this case, the sentence is saying that something might be caused by its own inherent wickedness.] In the given context, it seems that the speaker is suggesting that dislocation might occur because of some inherent issue with the joint itself. However, without more information about what "dislocation" refers to or the context of the text, we can't accurately translate this sentence into English. For because there is hard flesh within and above the lips, do not let it grow flesh. For there is too much pus. The loins are swollen, and the matter is of poor quality. The medicine is not good for the treatment. For, because corruption is a form of pestilence; For, due to the property in that area, digestion is slow, health is delayed, and it naturally swells. there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the treatments with medicines in the division.
Now I must tell you the remedy for a fistula made by handwork.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body. because there are fistulas that come from the veins, arteries, and nerves. or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in one of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all these fistulas are of grave illness, and there is only labor and ignorance in them.
And if there is any fistula that does not reach up to the level I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you investigate it, if you take a tent of bee wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, push it through.
and if the fistula is twisted, search for a thin reed stick, because the reed bends around the twist;
And if the fistula (a small abnormal passage or cavity) at the hand has been torn apart, you cannot find it again with probing, If the hernia (protrusion of an organ or tissue through a weak spot in the surrounding muscle or connective tissue) has come out through one of the openings,
because moisture is so short from one opening to another, and it should be cleaned.
Then carefully probe it to the best of your ability to determine if there is bone or nerve involved and whether it is fully closed.
And ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press on it with your hand, and where they feel it.
And when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein. In any of the places that I have told you, if the edge is cut according to what I have told you.
In any of the places that I have told you, if the edge is cut according to what I have told you. And bone should be removed from the fracture and the corrupt cartilages that are within. And then the cure until it is healed.
and if the fistula is well penetrated straight through, it is necessary that you close it completely, as much as you can, then I put dampened tents filled with medicine into the fistula, and push them up to its head,
then I put dampened tents filled with medicine into the fistula, and push them up to its head, As long as the medicine corrodes the surplus that remains at the bottom;
and then put warm bandages on the healthy flesh, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this means, then cauterize as we have said,
And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, break it. If vein or nerves do not burden or main members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, wait until all the corruption is removed, then heal it with soothing salves until it heals completely;
if it does not heal and bows again as before, Know that you are not yet at the fountain:
cover and remain as long as you are at the bottom. remove all corruption, then restore the place;
if it is in such a state, that is good. If not, know that corruption is too far advanced, that you cannot reach it. if there is no other remedy but to let nature take its course.
and if there is a small bone corruption, and you can extract it with pliers. if it can be extracted with one tool.
And if there are many bones, draw them all out, do not leave any of them.
and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear, cover and moisten and wrap the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something warm and moist over the wound, And let [the joint] be surrounded by tendons around the bones,
And then [it will be] easier to move the bones.
and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, let [the bone] remain until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part corrupting down to the bone: if it is necessary to be covered entirely up to the corruption, and then heal it until it heals over.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happens to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man of around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within his body,
until the matter came to his leg, and it was burst out with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it further.
but the fools, through their folly, overdid (the incision) so much that the abscess opened and they dug too much into matters, and it became a fistula, and much pus came out that everyone bent down with moisture from the body.
and many fools put cures on it for two years but there was no healer skilled in medicine.
until I was called to see the leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, And those who run through wounds with great haste; And the bodies of the young men turn red, and they have a yellow complexion.
I set up a tent at one of these wounds, then searched for all the wounds,
And I found that the one was coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hastened, and cut into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupt and rotten, and the corruption reached the bone within;
I considered that there was no other corruption in the bone than what remained;
and began to heal the wound with salve for a long time, but it would not close.
And then examine [the area] and uncover the bone as before,
And find the continuous corruption in the bone, and I cleaned it, and then left it open, and then tried to mend the joint.
but I could not join it altogether as I wrapped around a palm of the bone, and pulled it too hard. Then I restored it with medicines; and it healed and mended quickly,
And it should not begin work again except due to the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For due to the blood evacuation it often happened, but he was completely healthy,
For due to the blood evacuation it often happened, but he was completely healthy, And there grew a hard cartilage in the place of the bone, and it was well-placed and had no harm or opposite effect anywhere, neither at arrival nor at coming.
And extract the corrupt flesh beneath the skin of the head, and expose the flesh on the surface where you want to be, so that the bone does not prick the flesh; and put a splint or a flat piece of wood underneath the bone to protect the corrupt flesh; It must be as much as possible to see and feel the corruption, and be checked again.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then put a splint underneath; afterwards, heat it with a hot iron.
and let the splint be from one part of the corruption to the other, and let the splint be the length of the corruption as we have said;
And if the corruption is at the joint, strike the corrupted joint and the bone that it contains from the other side;
And if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cover [the affected area].
And if corruption is in the end of the hand or the foot, it is a very difficult matter. But it is necessary that you investigate this corruption, how it opened. and clean it in all the ways you can, but do not harm the vein or the nerve.
And know that the incision tool and the saws for covering these bones are numerous, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them. and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness. and for that reason, it is necessary to equip each type of work with its appropriate tool.
And know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art. And the testimony of the ways of diseases; Choose the instrument that you need according to what is required.
the fire The cheeks may swell due to something inside or outside.
And when you have remedied this corrosion through the use of medications, but they do not help at all, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes from. so that the patient may perish from this through death or through a greater ill-will due to the failure of the member.
so that the patient may perish from this through death or through a greater ill-will due to the failure of the member. and the signs are that the member becomes black as if it were burned by fire, And then comes the blackness, afterwards goes the corruption of member to member, It takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten to cover it,
and if this is by the bite of certain venomous creatures such as sea scorpions and snakes and similar,
If the corruption is at the head of the neck, if you cover it, do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, strike at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
If it reaches the forearm, strike at the edge; if it passes the edge, that is death. and there is no use in applying remedies outside of its quantity of virtue;
and act accordingly when the corruption comes or is putrefied: if it comes in the first joint, strike after the other joint;
And if it comes or falls, cover all of it; And if it goes up in the leg, cover at the knee joint;
And if it comes above the knee, there is no remedy for the sick but death.
and the method of covering or caring for the limb is such that you bind it above and below. extend one minister one of the lower straps, and another minister the other strap upward. and you cut open the flesh between the two straps one thumbwidth wide, so that the bone is exposed.
then you cover or bandage it, putting on one side a linen cloth, so that the wound does not touch healthy flesh. And comes another injury and abscess to the patient.
And if bleeding comes when you work, then cauterize the area quickly, or you put some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
Then tie the limb with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to one person in the leg:
He had a dark swelling that looked like it was burned by fire,
and this corruption first appeared in his thigh bone, until it covered the entire thigh.
And when the bones see corruption, he strikes them with copper [instrument] and makes them healthy.
and long afterwards corruption or decay of the hand returned to him, and it came to me.
and I placed him in restorative things after the body's cleansing, but the corruption could not stop.
and you request that I cut off his hand, but I do not want, for I have hope of restoring the matter; And also doubted if I were to amputate his hand, he would not die. for the virtue of man was weak; and he lost all hope, and returned to his land. and if I strike his hand with a sword, it will be well (healed).
And I have not thought of anything else except that this can be done differently if it is necessary.
An abscess sometimes appears in a charred area and remains for so long that it causes a large swelling of boils. Then they run and pierce, and the boil bursts, and the place becomes visible, like a wound of a knight; and the skin that is above it is as thin as a piece of linen unraveled; and they do not reach the bone or the nerve, and such illness is called "sain".
but if it extends all the way to the bone in depth, it is called "fistula";
and the cook should be such that you cut through the entire hide, and in the same way when it is subtle, like a cloth; and it does not disappear due to its corruption.
And if you have a suspicion that the flesh is hardening, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with pus, cure it with clisteria (a medicinal enema):
check if the breasts are swollen and the boil that is in it has a foul smell, then apply Egyptian medicinal clisteria (enema) made as follows: Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, and cook them in one vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and thickens to the consistency of honey;
and then take according to your need from it, and make it into an ointment and a syrup, and apply the poultice to the breast, and compress the wound; And leave the medicine inside for 2 hours, then draw it out by pulling.
do this many times, until the breast is drained of pus;
and sometimes cleansed with water and ashes, when this medicine is not present, take vine ash, pour water over it,
Then let it bleed, and anoint it with ointment, until you know that the breasts are well healed.
if the patient cannot bear it, nor Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, if you anoint it with water and honey or a little powdered gallstones. or you anoint it with honey and sweetened wine, where the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing. And the wine makes the blood thin;
and when you have done this, and you have confidence that the breasts are well cleansed, if the suppository made to stimulate chyme in him,
And you shall prepare an emulsion of pennyroyal and make it with rose oil and wine. and you shall coat it with certain medicines and liniments, of which I have spoken about their properties or treating the liniments.
And if the breast wound is small, and the linen cloth of the liniment cannot enter. If a wound caused by a small knife is large, put an Egyptian ointment plaster over it. or basilicon ointment, as long as it is large;
and if the wound is too large, cut and leave one to two leagues or the lancet can enter.
If the hernia that bulges is above, press it down or lower than it. For when the bow is fully drawn, do not let it release the arrow. and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner that the bow bends to its lowest point.
and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see. arrange it in this manner: let the boil run easily downwards, and do not leave anything of the boil. take consolidating medicine for putting on the breast,
And stretch over it a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then press the force against the wound of the breast with something wider than the first (pressure). Then anoint it softly with another cloth according to the size of the wound, and lay it on the wound of the breast to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days.
And he who is on the breastbone, often opens for removing the break, knows what comes from the break, if it's poisonous or infected or digested or undigested.
takes care whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
when your medicine has been applied in this way and you see the nature that rises on the breastbone. If you know that breasts swell up, then approach them with care;
and in the morning or at midday, when you are about to open the wound, change one bandage for another, and renew the ointment.
If the breasts are swollen and do not improve after several days, know that they will not swell further. And if subtle poisons attack after a long time, do not despair of health.
for the healing approaches. For there are people whose wounds heal slowly, and those who make it worse.
and if a badly digested bowel moves through the chest after many days, know that breasts do not move.
and if the breasts are slow to grow, and are swollen, apply drying medicine with moist substance and dry qualities. As an ointment defined, for it contains much vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
take ointment defined, made with rose oil, and rosehips of equal substance in quantity.
then cook and apply it; and the same made in a more cooked state, swollen, when ointment defined is not present,
Take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is over the fire. Then place one cloth and lay it on the chest, and sometimes administer an aromatologist long oil. and roots of celestial lily, which is as fine as flour and cinnamon.
and roots of celestial lily, which is as fine as flour and cinnamon. And use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder and put it on the honey that I mentioned, and use. And if the patient is prolonged (i.e., not healed), and is not cured by this treatment,
And if the patient is prolonged (i.e., not healed), and is not cured by this treatment, therefore learn that corruption is imminent, and it creates pressure on the bone, or on hard members, or ligaments; if the cure of this fistula, as we have said before, does not heal the patient.
of the abscess at the nailbed
Pancreatic abscess is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger. or under the toe, or by chance it may arise in other fingers;
and when it becomes inflamed and no care is taken, an abscess forms. and they cut and throw boils until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance they may cut it entirely.
And comes the corruption to the bone, until it brings pain that smells, and the head is wide open, and the color is drained away.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help at all. Then you must cut into it. Remove all the excess that remains from the nail. then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and when the nail follows the flesh closely, and it begins to swell and crack, you must put the radish under the nail to prevent the flesh from touching; And raise it up, and strike the flesh gently and lightly. and place on top of the remaining flesh the remnant of the medicine that is burning and corrosive to remove everything.
If the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and draw out pus, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the thumb bent, strike it with a hammer as previously mentioned, then heal it until it is healed;
and if it is wounded, broken, and causing great pain, it must be drained first; Then strike the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse cutting motion from above,
And be careful that the cut does not reach down to the flesh below the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
If it happens, place something on top to alleviate the pain.
The patient must cauterize who is born in some men's hands by chance, it is all fleshly. and sometimes there is bone or nail, and occasionally there is a nail.
and none of them are born in the root of the joint, but rather in some of our fingers. The one who is born in any nail does not grow out, And if one is born at the join of the thumb, by chance he remains mute;
The size of that who is fat is light, in this manner: the length in its root like a broad spoon.
If one is born at the root of the join, he is difficult to cure; keep him covered.
In one who is born or about to die, it is necessary that you cut the cartilage roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw for this, then cure it until it heals.
The same sores that come at the joints come together by birth, or by injury of a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
If it is necessary to cut the sore, so that it can heal according to its natural forms; Then place between two tents or damp cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together. and you put thin pieces of wood between them so that the joints are glued together, as necessary.
In the same way, if any of his hands comes with the palm, then strike that joint as necessary.
Of people
The veins are large, swollen vessels filled with melancholic excesses, which come into many members of the body.
And it happens more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore, you must sometimes administer purge of bile, and then let it flow from the basilica (biliary duct).
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is to hit them, and the black blood is drained out. And the other way is to open a vein and let it bleed completely.
The incision method is as follows: first make an incision on the leg with very hot water until the flesh softens. Then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the knee. Then open the vein in one, two, or three places, of a wide size,
Then draw and let out the black blood from the one end to the other, as much black blood from it as the strength of the patient can withstand.
and then tie it up, and instruct him to bind himself with meat colored black.
and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, it is beneficial for the patient.
The swelling of it [the affected area] is as follows: measure the limb of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then place it in water, and raise the limb in warm water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you do not have water, heat it on fire, and then press it against the vein along the length of the thigh or in the part below the ankle;
then scrape the skin with a knife at the edge, and cut open the vein from both sides, until it appears when you feel it;
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters or skin resembles a white cord;
then push the rod inside until it reaches the skin, and then pierce it gently.
then strike it in another place four fingers' breadth away; then peel the skin over the vein as far as it appears, then tie the rod to the vein, as you did, and pierce it again at another angle, as you did before.
Then take another size, or more if needed, then warm it, and apply to the base of the foot.
Then straighten and warm up to the second size; then cut it piece by piece until it comes out completely, and apply.
And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, push an awl with a single strong double thread through it. Hold the awl straight and draw it out, then turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out. And keep it from bruising, for if it bruises, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have treated it, place on the wound a cloth dampened with vinegar and rose oil; and let it heal until it is healthy.
And if the wound is contracted, twisted, and rolled together, not straight as we have said, Then you must cut it obliquely, but do not cover it; and draw it as we have said before.
Then you must cut it obliquely, but do not cover it; and draw it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein is curved and does not cut, it should not pierce the vein.
and is of large curve, for if it is subtle, it would pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
From the civil vein (a blood vessel)
This vein is opened in legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in ground where there is no moisture.
And sometimes it grows elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to the corruption coming from under the skin.
if it comes inside the body and spreads, open between the skin and flesh.
If the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very large inflammation, Then change the joints, and start the vein to come out, as a root of a plant does.
When the shoulder is open, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of wood from 6 to 8 inches long and bind it.
and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it comes loose from the wound, wrap it again around the wood and bind it. And if it is too long, cut a part of it and roll up the remaining, do not cover it at its root until it comes out completely. if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, cause an abscess and pus or a bad illness.
because of that, it must be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
sometimes this vein is about five fingers long or ten, And one man came to me, whose length was ten feet, and when you cut it, push a pound or a hole through it, and pierce it all the way down,
so that everything inside is emptied out; and bring the matter within it to its place, and apply the medicine in the form of poultice for three days, then treat it as an abscess.
And sometimes with this vein, many raindrops come out, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or hand, And it comes much from ruptures, and where it jumps around; cure it then as we have said before.
From worms that are born between skin and flesh.
This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often occurs in cows.
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body swelling and subsiding, It sends [the patient] great pain from member to member as it desires, until it breaks the skin or jumps forth;
It is poisoned by corruption of some humors, such as those that come towards and resemble snakes, worms, and parasites or the stomach;
and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, it ascends to the head, and reaches the eye; By chance, oil enters [the body] and is destroyed; this happens many times.
When you want to cure and draw it, one can only force it when it wants to go out:
Therefore, you must tie the loin (intestines) above and below with a strong, narrow cord:
Then press above and pull out forcefully, and if the head is full in the flesh, and you do not find it, If you cauterize with fire until it dies;
and the greater harm that it does, is that it runs the oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold a bellows under it, then strike above, and draw it out;
and the patient must use a bodily cleansing of medicinal solutions to remove harmful humors;
And if they are spoiled with meat poisoning.
Of the pain that comes from wind-sickness This disease is called "wakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and it moves from member to member; as I have told you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of her arm;
And afterward, it began to rise like a worm towards the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as hot iron when it is cut from one piece to another;
the pain spread from that place and pierced into the shoulder,
And then a little while after it runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm.
Then I saw that it would repeatedly turn around the body.
I was greatly surprised how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this kind of disease in such a manner before. Indeed, I had seen many cases where the pain moved from one place to another, But I had not wanted it, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins exposed. and because of this, the constrictions of wind appear;
and do not apply to those who are healthy and have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you wish to cure this disease, and the patient feels this pain, if it opens as we have said, press down hard on both sides and then push upwards until the windiness is constrained to its place. and cauterize the spot; if you do not see it with your eyes,
If the treatment for those suffering from windiness is like poison pills or Serapion pills, and similar ones.
If the treatment for those suffering from windiness are arrows or needles.
Arrows or needles come in different types, depending on their shapes and the parts of the body they pierce.
The diversity among them is that there are some with large points, small ones, rounded, and pointed. And of those with two joints, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are parts or fragments; And the dislocation in any limb occurs in two ways: either in the principal member, the head,
like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. If the dislocation occurs in any of these members, then the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter will be apparent to you: It is necessary for you to be cautious about the extraction of this arrow, for many deaths follow in various situations. And if this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully inserted, draw it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when an arrow pierces the bone and the socket that is above the skull, is when the eye becomes cloudy and swollen, and inflamed and red around it, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. And by chance, it may occur without force from the nostrils or ears; and by chance, speech and voice may be lost. And from the wound white moisture jumps out, resembling pus, and also jumps like boiling oil.
If this sign appears, refrain from the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels like it has been stuck in something hard, not empty. And by chance, the seventh becomes mute like hair, and in black blood it bleeds, and there comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, one can doubt that death is coming.
The sign of an arrow that pierces the body is when a scab does not rise from the wound and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, breathes heavily and seeks warm air.
If the arrow falls on the bed of the sick person, it has pierced the sides; and he spits a large amount of saliva and feels great pain and breathes heavily; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if the arrowhead or stomach falls out by chance, anything from the undigested flesh may jump out of the wound.
If the arrowhead or abdomen falls out and something from the intestinal tract jumps out, there is no hope in the treatment nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrowhead falls into the bladder and urine jumps out and spills, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other limbs, such as the hand, arm, neck, shoulder, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and those similar, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason you should do something else.
It happened to one man that an arrow struck or pierced the root of his neck: I pulled it out from the other side under the fat of the ear and it was harmless without any damage.
And I played a game with an arrow that struck in the oil sac under the paper, And the arrow was inserted, and it could not reach beyond its point towards the bone. And the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all one piece of light iron without ears; the patient recovered, and no harmful accident occurred.
It passed an arrow through the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears.
I was a barber, and I was skillful enough to pull it out, and the Christian recovered.
And take an arrow out of one man who was shot or stabbed, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days, his condition did not improve; I cut above the arrow, pulled it out, and had no bad outcome.
If one man is shot or stabbed, and the wound is sewn shut;
And the arrow remained inside it, and did not change its natural position. nor was found detrimental in any of its natural workings.
And a man, who got an arrow in his face, and the wound became closed.
and it remained thus without suffering great pain for a long time, and many similar things happened.
And treat an arrow wound in a knight of the king who was struck within the neck, and was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely buried.
I was summoned to the treatment after it happened seven days ago. I found the wound very narrow.
I stretched it with a fine tent and felt no pain. And he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead.
I applied the plaster attractant and digestif because the wounds did not swell. And I saw the arrowhead of the wound.
And I saw the arrowhead of the wound. I place the plaster on the wound for many days, and straighten the fracture directly, and keep the patient for a long time.
until he feels the arrowhead inside his neck for one day; then tell him. I put a corrosive medicine on the wound by hand, until it is opened.
and probe it, and feel the head of the arrow that adheres to the place; Then I align in the opening of the wound with that ague medicine, until the head of the arrow becomes visible.
and he passed well beyond the four-month term.
and then I cut open the wound that I had punctured with the pincers, and it refused to heal from one side or the other.
Then I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I took the pincers well made for a whole day. According to its form that will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I follow it and restore the wound.
And the judges decide that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I then restore it, and the wound heals, and the patient is completely healed.
And I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, If you apply your remedy to this (condition), I do not say that you should not do otherwise, because the books cannot completely grasp everything.
but wise masters comprehend little things and things that are present and failing. True nine times out of eleven, and nine times are the instruments, in the examination of things strange that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter into limbs where they are thrust except according to two ways: Or by what side they enter, or from another part;
and that which jumps out where it enters is an arrow penetrating into the flesh, and jumps out occasionally.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is swollen around it and the opening is closed;
and if it is driven into the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and move it every day;
And then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, pierce it all around with a fine needle, until the joints around it are opened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is placed back in the body where it cannot be seen, you should seek it with all your might; and if you feel it, you must draw it out with any suitable instrument.
and if the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow prevent it, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein if the wound is large enough; And pull the arrow out if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow as it is,
And pull the arrow out if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow as it is, and remove the foreign body that is embedded in two parts into the muscle as far as you can, and then break or bend the arrow's ears until you can pull it out.
and then break or bend the arrow's ears until you can pull it out. be careful not to break the arrow, but try to pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it once, pull down the leg to the joints, then draw, for extraction will be easier. And if bleeding prevents you from performing the extraction, bring forth what we have said in its chapter for treatment;
and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and use devices as you can pull out the arrow without risk.
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow struck him. For it is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot do it, have it done as the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, or it opens something of it, or the skin is swollen around it, as one can see or feel clearly:
Then cut through it, as long as the tweezers can take hold, and then pull it out; if it is not possible to do so now.
And if it [the dislocation] is held within the bone, you should turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, you should leave it for a while, and then continue the extraction until it comes forth.
and if it is of an arrow shaft, push it all the way through;
and if it fell and you want to administer a poultice, then administer one poultice made with cheese; If the point of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; then force it through.
And if the arrow is entangled (or caught) in the hair, apply force to the instrument, causing the pointed end to penetrate and ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touching (or lodged in) something, you should cut all the flesh around the area where the poison is present, if possible. Then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow falls or pierces in the belly, bladder, side, or kidney, and it is nearby, and you can cover over it, then do so.
And keep from covering the vein and the nerve, then extract it, then stitch the wound if necessary. and care for it until it heals.
The form of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Incisions of the common body cavities Incisions for draining are 31, of which there is a head of 16
This means: Two pans that are after the ears, which are called "double herb" and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible; And two veins which are in each eye, called "aspirates". The vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose. And the two tendons which are in the neck; And the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich". And two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head". And the middle part is called "fast," and it consists of the cephalic and basilic. And common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side. And common people call it "vein of the abdomen," and it is above the liver. This is the one that is used for bloodletting, which opens clearly at the pouch.
And the savatal is the vein which is between the auricular and annular [bones], and it has two rain(s).
and in the leg and foot there are four veins: one is under the calf of the left side. and the second saphenous vein which is at the wrist of the right side; and the vein called "nisse," which is in the wrist of the other side.
And in the other leg there are 3 veins beneath those [veins].
The veins that follow the ears help the ancient catarrhs and migraines. and the qualities of the vein, as I say to you, are such that you rise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the vein, as I say to you, are such that you rise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw. As long as the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: Then, where you feel the pulse beneath your neck, press firmly.
Then take the lance, and push it through the vein to the bone, then withdraw your hand along the entire vein, Cut through the skin and vein with two blows, and make the blood come out until you see it.
Then hold and bind it, until it is healed;
And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, is worth to migraine old-age people, And it is also sooty and inflammation of the eyes, and to the heart of cold eyes.
And the qualities of the healer are as I say: and it is that the patient stretches out his neck, until two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse beneath your thumb, and then examine it carefully;
then lift the finger to the upper part of the vein on your index finger, and push the lancet underneath; Lift the vein up, strike it (as you have done in two other veins), and draw the blood as necessary.
Then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then form (the incision) carefully, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their dressing and extraction, where the book begins.
The healing of the forehead vein is worth as much as the healing of the head vein for facial diseases such as migraines and redness.
And the quality is such that the patient stretches his neck while turning, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "excavator", whose shape is as follows:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let blood flow according to the amount you see. Then separate the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is sealed and not open one time with a large flame.
In addition, the flames should not be too sharp; and obliquely, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames may break when they are fine.
The veins of the two eyelids assist in the eyes, and in the tear duct, and in the nostrils, and in the ear in oil, and in facial diseases.
And the quality of their veins is such that the patient can strain his neck by twisting some rope or cord, as previously mentioned.
Then, make it healthy, and let the incision be across [the affected area], a bit long and wide, for there is no flesh therein.
If the fire is thin, perhaps it may break; then correct the blood flow, as much as you need, and then cover it with linen, and bind it well.
The incision of the vein near the neck is good for ague, scrofula, and fevers caused by corruption. as well as migraines and redness that come from the face, especially when it is old.
And the qualities of the purgative are that the patient compresses their neck, then holds their genitals with your left hand, and take a subtle long flame, and thrust it between the two nostrils in the space, for the vein does not open well in this way, and the arteries will soon begin to bleed;
And do not go too far forward, make the wound cauterize according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is soon healed.
The salve of two kinds (guides) helps in the strengthening of the sinews, and at the beginning of inflammation, and in many diseases, and in stopping abscesses, and in corroding, and in sores, and in ulcers.
And the quality of the salve is such that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said; And let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient lie on one seat,
then let the vein heal along its length for a short distance, then draw out the blood moderately, as necessary;
Then reset (the dislocation) on the other side, then undo the ligament, and hold the veins moderately. Do not squeeze (the wound); let it heal by itself until morning, so that the wound is healed.
On the treatment of boils The treatment of mouth boils also helps with cold in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and cuts and sores around the mouth.
And the qualities of the salve are to make the patient sit before you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the jaw, and look at the two veins, one on the right jaw and the other on the left. and they are recognized by being black, and by the small black veins around them. Then take one or the other (the shoulder), and if you do not know them, and you are uncertain,
Then take one or the other (the shoulder), and if you do not know them, and you are uncertain, then take the largest one of each pair (shoulders), and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
From the incision under the tongue The incision under the tongue helps after the cephalic incision, and it is used for the treatment of throat diseases, eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
And the qualities of a blood-letter are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up the tongue, and looks under each side at a black vein:
And so both sides, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins along the side from which blood-letting is commonly done are done according to two methods:
or by puncturing with a sharp point made of myrtle wood or fine olive oil, and is called "anesil"; And they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
It must be necessary to open large veins with visible thick blood, and those containing thick and troubled blood: This is the form of the olive oil lamp:
And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for healing subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The healing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the healer to heal promptly, and to drain the artery that is beneath it. If he pierces the artery, and blood flow comes out, it should be stopped, as I have said. And the flame must not be pressed, but cut as with a saw.
And if the basilica does not open naturally, you must force it and change another. or you want any wound from him, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens naturally. And the cup to the flame anneal, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place of the wound, then you must also stretch out the arm and touch the place where you feel the pulse. Then mark the place with a sign, tie up the arm, and heat the vein with fire.
And be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery; avoid it then.
And if you see it rise high as a child's urine, and the limb is red and thin, know that this is not from an artery: Then place your finger firmly on top, press down for a long time, then cut off the limb where it turns pale repeatedly, as this often happens.
Leave the arm alone and do not move it, the patient should be afraid and not move it until it is healthy.
If the limb is not bleeding and it pains you, and there is no medicine present, then cut open the artery if it opens, because the head of the limb will retreat; stop the bleeding from the limb.
And take a bark of fustic, cut it, and take one half of it and bind it tightly until the next day.
If it does not stop bleeding, that's fine; if it does not, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And the stoppage of bleeding is not necessarily helpful in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the bandage on the arm.
The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and the lord must turn it by the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the patient suffers pain, and there is no healing.
And this nerve opens widely many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then you must anesthetize the area with the instrument; and press the nerve as hard as you can.
If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The pain of the skull helps, which draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to anesthetize by pressing on the olive oil or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins because there is no nerve nor artery beneath it.
Therefore, one must seek the easier joint, and not worry if it is necessary to do it for the first time, and one can repeat. And sometimes joints swell in some men, which requires it for the first time, but do not worry about it. The quality of urine is according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about urinating is that urination serves only for maintaining health,
And to avoid future illnesses; And the incision should be made in one of the four veins that are known as: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; And one should incise at the beginning of the thigh, in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
And one should incise on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The administration of medicine for diseases has no fixed hour, but when it is needed, day or night, in every hour and at all times.
And it is not advisable to treat children under the age of 14 or a woman carrying child for less than four months up until the seventh month. Old people over sixty years old should not be treated.
And when anyone wishes to be treated in any manner, it is necessary that the intestines should be cleansed with a mild cleansing agent. If much filth is retained, to the extent that veins do not expel intestinal waste from the principal members;
nor is he healthy who is excessively salted with meats, or drunk, to such an extent that he is feverish or dropsical.
and if diarrhea occurs after a colic attack, vomiting, abdominal distention, multiple abortion of a woman, excessive labor, watching, and fasting, or total loss of strength due to the weapon or body;
Then refine the bodily fluids, if it is swollen, by means of food and drinks and medications, if you have the power.
Then into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood.
and let the blood flow from the vein on the affected side, as we have said.
and keep yourself that day from labor, exertion, lust, and similar things;
And bind and hold the patient, raise the surgeon's hand higher than the patient, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times.
then gently pull the ligament above, as when it is too tight or narrow, it cannot be corrected without.
and then rub the area with hands until the veins swell, and feel them to ensure they are swollen.
and then wet the surgeon's hand with a little oil, then place his fingertip of his left hand on the vein below the area where he will lance it. That the vein does not open nor break at the incision. For there are veins that run like ropes in a sieve, and some are filled with venosity, For when heat is applied, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some of them.
And if they open a vein, the wound is too narrow, so the surgeons should be mindful of this.
If it opens the first time, that's fine; but if not, restart from the same place or shortly thereafter, unless the limb is swollen.
If the limb is swollen and the patient becomes fearful, wait one or two days and do not tie up the arm: In case pus ulcers arrive, they should not enter baths or water; then start treating the wound again if it pleases them.
And if the perforation is small or the wound subtle, and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, trust in the perforation itself entirely with all the flame directly.
Work it a little hastily, so that the flesh is inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh inflamed, do not start draining it, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is healed.
And so administer the oil of lard in every wound that you cleanse the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
And similarly use treacle and boil it when putting it on the wound; if it becomes too thick, thin it.
If an abscess becomes large, which happens many times, similarly when the opening of the vein is small, If you hurry, place a damp sponge soaked in vinegar and a little hot oil on it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for some days without any black or green discoloration, it does not matter. and if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh that has been steeped in calcament, mastic, or similar substances.
And often abscess and appearance appear at the healing of the basilica: place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to pressure from the hand, then that is a bad sign. Therefore, do not put anything above what has been said, because by chance without the artery; but let it be one plug of dry material to harden the place, then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
And draw out blood from each person according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is filled and hollowed out, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
And to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed a little and often, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the corruption of blood and the compression of nerves, and it is more effective than long bloodletting or wide bloodletting.
And for the one whose body needs to be purged, it is necessary to give soft bread with pulp of pomegranates; if he is hot, bleed him four or five times.
And if he is of cold complexion, eat before purging soft bread in syrup, or syrup of honey aromatic with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a fragrant syrup.
If he has diarrhea during purging, after the flow of blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat and a subtle fragrant syrup.
And use other things as we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
If you want to dislocate someone's arm and then relocate it at another time, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be done little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And whoever wants to dislocate someone's arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong heart, should wait 9 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to be bled from another part, should be bled on the second or third day.
For there is much blood inside the body which is already overheated and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw a large quantity and widen the opening until it can pass through. and reward all the conditions of health, place your hand on top of the foot when it is healthy, so that death does not come in its place. and this happens many times when the healers are negligent;
and it is not necessary that you dislocate the arm again, draw blood a second time, and the wound is closed, but you should press firmly. If it is curved, extend the arm forcefully, for it would be harmful.
but leave it until it heals the second time; or you pierce it with the point of the flame, until the congealed blood that was in the vein escapes. and place one piece of fresh linen in boiling water and press lightly on it.
And if a vein has burst, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess is pacified.
If it requires drawing blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
The vein in the arm is safer to use instead of the one in the neck because it is composed of different vessels.
The way to draw blood is that the patient pushes their hand into boiling hot water until the vein turns red.
Then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then keep pressing gently across, neither too wide nor too long.
and make the incisions wide, and press well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be extracted, place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out in the hot water, until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, do not plunge the hand into hot water, as it puts it more in winter than in summer.
And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, for there is no artery or nerve in it.
The swelling of the vein of the right hand is worth all liver diseases, and this is the method:
press the hand, and put in hot water until the vein swells up if you can see it; If the wound is transverse, and if you close it completely, it will cause no harm.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all exposed under skin.
Then put your hand in hot water, if the wound is frozen and cannot be extracted.
And when you have let the blood as much as needed, put oil and linen over the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
The purification of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of paralysis, and it should be done in the same way as I told you concerning the right side.
The purification of the sole is beneficial for all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of flow (menses), disease of the kidneys and thighs, and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its purification are that the patient should immerse his foot in hot water and rub it on the vein until it bleeds, And lay it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many rivers.
Then, lay it on the larger river or at the ankle, which flows more easily.
And if you lay it on the leg below, watch out for nerves that are beneath it, and lay it through just as in cutting; let the flames be extinguished.
And if the leg cannot be extracted, place it in the water and let the vein drain well.
And if the blisters require treatment for the first time, start with the second one slightly above, because the area is salted; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and proceed with the same method for the sole of the other foot equally.
The salted area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its blister is worth the pain of the heel when it is hot with blood.
And the qualities of its blister are that the patient immerses it in water and squeezes above the ankle four fingers' width.
Otherwise, the vein will not open; and if it opens, heal it in all possible ways that you can, and by crossing over. It is better to close it, because the place is empty, and it is much more vulnerable to hands of men.
It is better to close it, because the place is empty, and it is much more vulnerable to hands of men. And if you don't bind it, there will be no blood to stop its opening or the top of the foot, and beware of nerves.
Make as much pressure on the blood as you can see, then untie the string, and place cotton on it and bind it again; it is now healed.
From the blisters (of cupping)
Blisters (of cupping) are made from horns or goat's horn, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by bleeding and drawing blood, or without bleeding.
And this type of cupping that does not involve bleeding is done in two ways: either it is done by fire, or without fire.
and two more in the sides of the neck; and the bladder underneath the chin; and the bladders of the two shoulders; and the bladders above the ankles; and the bladders in the two arms; and the bladders in the two legs; And the boils of the two shins; and the boils do not bleed, unless from small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and for this reason, do not open them at all, as one does with bloodletting from a vein; and it should not be administered in any case, neither with hot water nor heated water, in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is emptied.
If it is necessary for diseases to bleed, or according to custom, we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at every time;
For there are some who, when they need to ventose, have heavy heads;
and those who find swelling and redness in their belly, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes;
And those who have a drop of blood in their mouth and have swollen tongues, and exude blood; And if [there are] some who think, and see by no blood or abscesses or death or similar things.
When we see these signs and especially when it is in the month [of the disease], we order to bleed after 3 hours of the day.
The purging of the muzzle helps with the gritting of the teeth ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the entire body;
And this ventosation is in the location of the head of the cervical (spine)
and it should not be used by those with cold constitution or who have scabies, for it does them great harm;
and therefore the elderly should not use it, nor those with head colds diseases.
And those who often heal themselves become obtuse, and for this reason, the blister should be placed a little lower due to the risk of becoming obtuse.
The ventosation is placed on the neck at the base of the skull and in the basilica, and for that reason it is useful for the stretching of the bones. and to cut through the channel of the vertebra, and immediately, and to be filled up.
It must be pushed gently, for if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction or blockage in the belly or in the heart.
The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are useful for headaches, migraines, strangulation and pain in the roots of the teeth.
And it should be in the position of the basilica's sacred place; and you must instruct the lord to press his hand to put it, not strike the artery, and no bleeding should come.
Ventilations under the chin are good for mouth disease and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it should be in the positions of the two cheeks.
Ventilations of the shoulders are good for disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The ventosations of the sides are as valuable as three veins from the arms. for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the lord not to cut too deeply, for the veins are naked of flesh, and it knows beneath dark and arteries.
The boil on the buttock is effective for treating hemorrhoids at their base and diseases underneath, and it should be large and made of lard, as it needs to be well-drawn; and if it were subtle, it would break; and in that case, it causes great wounds.
The boils on the legs open widely because they draw blood from the whole body, and they are effective for treating old pains in the joints, such as those of the knees and ankles, and they remove the flower; and they are located between the shins and the knees, and the ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring down pus in various dispositions.
The method of applying the boil is that you put it first and apply it promptly, press it evenly, and continue this action until you see the place turning red and swelling, and opening the redness of blood; then wait and put the boils back, taking care in the disposition of the body, as there are those with soft skin and clear pores: it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make wide and deep wounds, and a little superficially.
And if the limb is thick, it should be cut twice: the first time to make a path for the thick blood.
And if the limb is very thick, it should be cut three times; and when we want to draw out the thin blood, we only need to prick once.
If we want much blood, we should encourage it frequently; and if the limb is thick, we pierce deeply and let the veins be punctured suddenly.
And it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and are narrow-pored, that you anoint the joints of the swellings with stimulating and dissolving oil. if it is in this case, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from the seeds of cucumbers.
and if it is in a fever, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
And if the superfluidity is large and cold, take amat oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others like it.
And if one to whom you are applying hot iron has wide and large pores, no oil should be applied.
but it should be washed after the application with rose water, or cold water, or water of morello cherries, or water of gourd, or water of pottery, or any similar.
And one who has much moisture, if he rises from bed, should do so with asafetida or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And one with large superfluidities rises with old wine or grape juice, or the infusion of anise or chamomile, or similar.
And it is not advisable to bleed with a cupping glass before bathing nor in the bath, but an hour or two after bathing, and one should not sleep after cupping.
And it is necessary that he urinate, when he should be bled and after being bled. Watch the one who bleeds is bilious, and if he is not enough or too inflamed; It is necessary for him to take cold things, such as raw pomegranates, endives and lettuce leaves; and similar items.
and also consume purgatives, meat of the chestnut, and moist meats.
And those with a cold constitution, should take honey syrup, fragrant moderate wine (between old and new), purgatives, and also consume parsnips, small birds, and young birds.
On the day he will vomit, he should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some men sometimes triticale or muscatel before swelling, or after, for strengthening the main limbs; And thin the blood of those who are hot, but it is not necessary that those who are cold drink it.
The boils placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach, intestines, and hernia, as these members cannot bear to be pierced,
And they do not make him do it except to draw blood from one member to another, as we put on the breasts when the milk is thick in the member, to remove the viscosity that is in the body, just as we put leeches on the belly and the buttocks to reduce the body.
and remove the pain when there is an abscess or stone, it removes by its virtue attracting accidentally the abscess, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and in this way, it does when placed on the liver and the spleen when there is retained wind,
And these blisters are treated empty to be sucked only; and sometimes they are treated with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
as in diseases of the lungs, and in this way the blister is filled with hot water or water in which cooked healing herbs have been steeped.
The shape of the blister to be treated with fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth wide, and have one small hole, as for pushing an awl,
and it should be made of iron, soft before so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the member;
and have in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to put a handle on it;
and let them be large or small depending on the diseases and age of those who take them.
For the blisters of children are different from those of the elderly, and thin from thick ones.
And one should put this blister on the member thusly:
Take a beeswax candle or thread, and place it through the blister at the center which is in the blister, so that the light is at the bottom of the blister so as not to burn the patient.
And then lay it on the member, and your fingers should be above the wound as we have said, so that when one sees, if there is steam, one removes the bladder.
Then take the linen thread as before and reinforce it often, if necessary.
In the bladder used in disease of pleurisy, there is no vein or wound, and it is not brought unless when it is full of liquid, and it is placed only on the member.
and this is its shape:
Sanguisettes are not introduced except in members where bandages cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. and in bare flesh, like the buttocks or genitals, and other similar places;
and if the quality of the patient is such that when you find sanguisettes in sweet clean waters without purulence, take them.
and put them in a new container of sweet water until they are familiar with it and have nothing inside. And then let it be drained of vein and abscess, then rub the member until it turns red and put on plasters.
And when they are full and hot, if it is possible to apply a leech, do so, for it is very helpful.
If not, lift the affected limb and immerse it in warm water, then wrap it.
And if the healthy limbs become cold due to the plasters, immerse one linen cloth in cold water and place it on until the wound is healed.
And if the wound is multiplying, place it on crushed glass or vitriol, and similar things, until it scabs over.
And you place half-peeled beans on the wound and leave them until they scab over at the site, it will stop now.
And if more help is needed, take other willows.
And if the willows do not want to be taken, rub the wound with fresh blood or insert a needle until the juice flows out. And then lay them down (the limbs), and as soon as they feel the blood, let them harden.
When you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little aloe vera and lin powder or ashes on it, and they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures (breaks)
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the foolish fool casts himself out of this chapter, who will never see any old books, nor read any letter in them.
and for this reason, science is alienated from our land, because I have never found anyone good at it.
and I know nothing else, except through the knowledge of old books, where I have studied extensively to treat the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Therefore, it is necessary that we explain the summary of this book's content and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
When any break or dislocation, twisting or distortion comes to anyone, you must hasten to heal the patient on both sides, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or the elderly.
If the time is not too hot or too cold, avoid eating cold foods, such as frosty meat and mutton or veal eyes, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of the abscess heating up, or of the spread of matter to the limb; if the patient follows these primary rules that he has used before.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed on foods that cause thick stools, or have viscosity like cooked barley in water and peas, and beef, and pork, and veal, and mutton, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For this thick stool, the healing of the fracture is quicker.
And know that the broken bones of the old and debilitated cannot be well healed or repaired according to their nature due to the relaxation of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, as the bones of small children.
But has no cure, reset on the broken bone.i.e. large splints which press and join the limb together, as much as it was before; and do not let him move at all from his work, and for this reason he should be fed with large foods, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
For the fracture of the head (skull) is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures. For there is a fracture which goes towards the elbow, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
For there is a fracture which goes towards the elbow, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small split.
And each type has its tool and instrument proper for restoration, according to what memory comes in its place.
And fractures of the bone are known by this that the joint is twisted and wide open at the end, and it is pressed by the hand.
And when it [the dislocation] has no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no breakage.
But it may have twisting, a fracture, or a small break. Do not move the hand at all, but place medicine on it that comes afterwards, and then hold it gently.
And know that the breaks that occur at an angle and are the two separated parts, they must now be made equal again, so that abscesses do not come in.
And if abscesses become hot, let him leave them for some days, until the abscesses are appeased. Then make it equal to the mouse that you can easily and skillfully catch, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of one where there are broken bones; then hold it, as is explained hereafter.
And if the bones are broken into pieces, divide it into two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand.
And set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the member are disjointed, reset them with all means the additions in their places as you can, and ensure that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And align well the two bones correctly according to the best shapes.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that they are not correctly aligned: straighten them nicely, and do not strain or press too much as those who force it out by their work produce abscesses and contractions in the member, as we have seen many times.
And when the limbs are set, carefully immobilize the patient so that he does not move, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. And ensure that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain. For if he feels no pain, it is not set correctly, and it must be placed in such a position that he feels no pain.
For if he feels no pain, it is not set correctly, and it must be placed in such a position that he feels no pain. And be aware that it should be put rightly so that deformities do not come when it is restored.
And the qualities of the broken member are as I tell you.
Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
For there are small members, such as fingers, thumbs, and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in fine linen cloths.
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and stiff linen, for the broad linen binds the entire large member, and restrains it evenly on all sides, so there is no swelling.
Then, tie light bandages around it three or four times according to the member, and hold your hand slightly on the entire length, then go above the fracture and hold it less, than the fracture, then move away from the fracture a little.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament, and wind it directly over the broken place.
Then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above.
Then place dampened linen or cloth strips between the joints until they are all equal, then tie it all together with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or abscess, place something soothing for the abscess that is hot and what removes the swelling on top, and leave it in this way for some days.
Then fasten your splints, and they should be half the width of a thick stick that is carefully sawed, or a rope from which they make ropes for ships, and they should be in this shape:
But it is necessary that the splint that a man places over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others.
And should also be as long as necessary for the member, whether large or small.
then bind the splint in the same way you did at the first joint, then sew it on using thread as done at the first fracture.
The bandage should be closer in this location, rather less so; and it is necessary that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
If the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who make their rope from twisted linen, it is a great error, because the twist cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stitch.
And if the patient is pierced by the limbs of the ribs after setting them in healthy bones, place linen or flax padding beneath them to prevent swelling.
When the wound is broken and the nerves are torn, I will tell the treatment below.
And know that it is not necessary to hold bones of broken members all day long on the first day. For large members, there should not be splints placed except after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of abscess healing.
And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: it is that you take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, on [the affected area], and this is the common method for restoring a fracture using plasters, and this is also suitable for women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of plaster for healing breaks, dislocations and twists: take albaries, lupine, elm, asafetida and Arabic gum, mix in ten parts; add myrrh and aloes, five parts; seven parts of alkali; then make a powder and mix with yolk of an egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition and quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many men.
Another method of plaster for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, mix in ten parts; add myrrh and aloes, eight parts; six parts of acacia; Armenian pitch ten parts; grind well, and mix with vinegar or yolk of an egg, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for dislocated joints and swollen bones, and to relieve the pain, they use the bone saw and break it: take new linen, wet in vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on the place. This plaster does not heal but is good for soothing hot abscesses and proper bone pains.
Another method of setting broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth wormwood, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another method of poultice to heal broken bones and to hasten the healing of an abscess. Take equal parts of mallow root, chamomile, viola flowers, beeswax flour, and grind them together; mix with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, mix with moist coriander water or vinegar, and apply it.
Another stronger method of poultice when the hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take equal parts of mallow root, flax seed, blackthorn, clover, and sassafras; also viola flowers and chamomile flowers; grind them together, and mix with either salt water, sweet water or vinegar, according to the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance besides a mixture of beeswax and oil should be applied to a broken limb for restoration, and it should neither be too soft nor too hard.
And Galen states that for restoring a broken limb, one should apply warm dry substances such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of application that is useful for wounds and pain: take mugath (possibly a type of plant) and chopped human hair or feathers of birds, and vis amalgam (a substance used in medicine), grind them all together to make a poultice and apply it to the affected area.
And then, dislocate a little after that, and be careful that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not dislocate it by hand for many days.
If pain, itchiness, lack of rest or swelling occurs at the joint, hasten and dislocate it, and remove the plaster immediately; take a light cloth, sea sponge dampened with water, and immerse in water; lift the joint until the itchiness stops, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen dampened with water or rose oil on it, and tie it up with a nut until you are sure that the abscess is warm.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and remove the pain, then begin the suturing subtly, and a little plaster, and not to strain it too much as before; and suture until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess has burst, become red, painful and swollen, and if you need plaster and linen, then suture it as you did before evenly.
If nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not remove it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the abscess breaks and the incision approaches the skin.
Then hold it more tightly than before, and make the flesh thicker, as I said earlier; and if you see the joint drying out more than necessary, know that nutrients cannot enter. Then apply hot moist heat every time you reset it, and for each three hours, loosen the bandage a little.
By this work, then cut the nutrients from the limb, and hasten to correct those who leave the limb twisted: it is harmful, and it is a work of fear; I do not see anything else than labor and working correctly.
diverse methods of fracture many ways of fractures are, and various shapes, and the causes are determined.
because there are fractures made by sword strike, and the shaft breaks the entire bone up to the splinter that is under the bone, as when hached or fisted; therefore this type of fracture is called "hachuring".
or the sword strikes the bone from above by piercing it and this type of fracture is called "complete"; and the wound caused by these two fractures can be large or small.
And if there is a bruise filled with blood, or a wound or arrow wounds, or falling upon a stone, or similar things.
If it is a swelling that approaches the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on the bone and this wound is either large or small.
And if there is an injury that has penetrated the bone as fine as a hair and it is a small wound, which is called this swelling "capillary".
And if the wound that is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or something similar causes the bone piece to enter within [the wound], and the joints are compressed like the blacksmith does when he hammers on cauldrons; if an arrow enters it.
This happens more often in those who have moist bones, such as a child's head bone;
And these types of breaks have small fragments dislodged, as I will speak in its place.
And we know all manners of breaks by the drawing on them, and the testing inquiry, and through the corruption of flesh that is above. (line-by-line translation)
The resemblance of the capillary is known by those who, when the bone is exposed and scraped above, if the break appears black. (line-by-line translation)
In the treatment of a break, take care of the patient's circumstances, and if you see any bad accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever, the hairs coming out and reddening, and other symptoms in various dispositions, it cannot heal with doubt. (line-by-line translation)
And if you do not see an overwhelming accident, and you hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
And when the splinter first comes to you in winter, it must be removed before the fourteenth day at the bone's mouth.
And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and the accidents we have mentioned come.
If the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary to make a cut in the affected area as follows: and take hold of the head of the splintered bone, and remove the covering from the bone on all sides, and above the wound more gently than you can.
And if blood flows to reveal the bone or abscess boils, assist with what is needed and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess boils subside, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is called the cutting method.
And then insert another, larger incision.
And the second method is that you have various sizes of blades, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made of iron not copper; and work lightly so as not to pierce the flesh.
And if the bone is hard and projecting, it is necessary that you pierce around it so that you provide blades with grooves, not sharp enough to penetrate beyond the bone surface, and above the point there should be a margin or circle that prevents the point from passing beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, each coming in its place at the depth of the bone, so that you have grooved blades for all cases; and this is the form of the four types of grooved blades:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one grooved blade on the bone and turn it with your hand until you feel the bone is pierced; then move the blade to another part a little afterward, and do this all around; then cut the space of the bone between the periosteum, and do this as delicately as possible, lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone or any of the tools you have, such as pliers or forceps; and make sure you do not touch the cerebral membrane or the dura mater.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the tightness that has remained on the bone or another similar instrument resembling an incisor, but it should be thinner and more delicate than the other incisors.
If something remains of the small bones or scales, remove them gently with one instrument; then treat the wound with what we have said.
And another way of work, which is more secretive, is the one that the Greeks call it, and they highly praise it, and this is their word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture moves open; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place it under the head of this concave incisor, as shown in the following figure:
And do not cut from one side only, and the parts are concave on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you cut lightly around the bone, but take care of the cloth that is underneath:
If it is adhered to the bone, remove it gently, for it is removed badly with harm and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is only split from above, and there are small fragments, then after smoothing it, remove the scales with a sharp rasp, having different amounts as necessary, in order to provide the most suitable amount for each place, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Start with a large rasp, then proceed with finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
In each of the other hair-like or subtle fractures, you must provide a treatment according to its nature; and this is not something that can be answered by one who has not studied this art.
And if the wound is open, you should take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 3 layers, wet it in wine and rose oil, place it on the first cloth; do this as lightly as you can, so as not to burden the wound, then administer another string but do not tighten it more than it just covers the wound.
and leave it for 1 day or 2, until the abscess subsides, then remove the string, and provide medicine such as marshmallow root, oats, incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and provide reliable medicines without bitterness.
And keep the wound always clean, do not leave any dressing or let it be covered with bandages, for when bandages are placed on the scalp, they rot and cause infection, which brings great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed upon it, it will bite through.
Then take care, if any harmful event befalls the patient as we have said, it is full of doubtful meaning.
And if there comes blackness not for any reason other than the medicine that has been applied to it, which may have such power, you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them with one piece of linen cloth and apply it upon it. Then the care of methods of treatments, as it is necessary, while he is healthy.
Sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or only one of them, since they are two bones, but the one below is cartilage and does not break, unless it causes a swelling or deformation, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger or thumb into the nose and align the fracture inside the nostril index, and at the pocket by exhalation, until the nose returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain due to your work.
And if the break is in the upper part near the neck and the thumb cannot reach its place, you must align it with the head of a ruler, a little bigger.
If it is broken in two parts, then do as before, and hasten to restore the first day if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has cooled down, then tie a linen cloth to the neck if the break is in one part.
If you step on another person or are stepped upon, it breaks [the bone] and the tendons become as thick as they fill the nostrils with pus.
And they said some remedy that one should moisten the tendons in butter and boil them each day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a concoction of egg white and milled flour; then leave the tendon until the bone is hard, and the cartilages have hardened.
And sometimes one steps on feathers of goose in place of tendons, and if it is wrapped with a piece of linen, and holds the breakage, and blows warm air [into it]; then do as you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the new (opening) while you are working on it, put either beeswax or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a small piece of lignum aloes, there.
And if abscesses do not come to it (the new opening), apply plaster from without, with flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with egg yolk, then put on light bandages, but do not tie the new opening too tightly.
and if the break in the new opening is small and it breaks into small pieces, then remove with suitable instruments, then close the wound, and treat with things that promote healing such as plasters and ointments.
And if there is no wound within the nose, treat it with cautery and insert sticks of lead until it heals.
Of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the break is only displaced and not broken through to the inside, but rather bent within, this can be recognized easily.
If the break is on the right side, you should put your index finger in the patient's mouth; if it is on the left side, you should put your index finger of the right hand and push gently into the break, then use the other hand to adjust it from the outside and align it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, then you must administer extension of two parts, equal in size.
If the teeth move or are broken, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a splint on the fractured jaw and put a double cloth over it; put a large and well-made cradle or piece of leather equal to the jaw lengthwise and crosswise, and secure it as you can, and command the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see the figure change, dislocate it on the third day and then reset it to its original position; put a poultice on top made with flour or wheat with egg, after removing the splint; put a light linen bandage over the poultice and if the dislocation reoccurs, leave it as long as it is healed; many times it heals in four weeks.
And if an abscess comes, bring what we have said many times.
And if there is breakage and wound together, take care that no piece of the bone is removed; use the tools suitable for that purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, you should widen it with fire as necessary.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, close the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for that purpose, to promote healing until it is healed.
From the lock (or fastening) The lock (or fastening) breaks many times in front of the shoulder, and the breakage is in four ways: or it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a break with wound.
And the operations are when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so one grips the shoulder where the lock feels broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then put the break in equal alignment with your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and has no appearance or bulging.
And if you need to extend more, put a round cushion of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and let it be thick according to your necessity; stretch and lift the lock, and hold the cushion with your hand, so that you align the break as needed.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of the joint because it comes in completely, then the patient must lie on their affected side, and a small pillow should be placed under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the socket is raised.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find broken bones, then it is necessary that you cut across them; and pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any obstruction, strike it at one of the incisions you made; but place this instrument under the socket to keep it open.
and resemble a spoon, not concave, and be as large as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the shape of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
And when you are certain of the abscess's heating, if it opens a wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt about the abscess's heating, then use linen and gauze to cover the wound, according to its size.
If abscess heating comes, wet linen in rose oil and asafoetida and vinegar, then place on top.
The bone's compression when it feels wounds and cuts is to put the plaster of milled powder and egg yolk on the bone, place light straws on top, and place a spear underneath if needed. Then take a very long bandage of a palm's width, then put one double cloth damp on top, and roll it up; then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the edge of the bandage hangs over. and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the chin, and under the patient's chin; and tighten it from each side, and when you see that the fracture aligns properly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then reinforce it daily, and when the swelling subsides, hold it in place.
and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under his chin to lift the shoulder up; align the fracture by moving the shoulder with force or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except for bad accidents occur, until 20 days.
Then, if necessary, begin the treatment and hold it steady, and leave it in this state until it is restored; and it is usually restored within 28 days, and sometimes sooner for some men.
of the shoulder dislocation
If the shoulder is dislocated or broken out of its socket and not moving, it should only be moved by touch; if the injury is apparent, align it according to the nature of the break, and reset it in all ways possible; then put powder from a mill with egg whites and light feathers on it, and cover it with two layers of cloth; then place a large and thin cushion over it, about one finger's width larger than the shoulder, and make sure the cushion is evenly spread under every part of the shoulder, so that the feathers fill the gap between the cushion and the shoulder equally; and then bind it tightly with a great bandage to prevent the cushion from moving from its place, and observe the patient daily; whenever the pain subsides, reset the shoulder if necessary, and keep the feathers evenly placed on the cushion; lay the patient on his side; and the shoulder will be restored within 20 or 30 days. And when this number is reached, unbind it, and be careful because it is not bone that becomes loose easily.
And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not below the skin, lift it up, remove the bone, and do as we have said in the fracture of the fistula to treat an abscess by heating.
of the fracture of the fistula
The piece is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks off at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks down below, causing the patient great pain, and without a splint, and quickly, and possibly vomiting blood, and the channels open in the broken bone, and he feels everything very badly.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back with their head down, and one cushion is placed between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed and the ribs are brought together to your hands, and it must be done carefully so that the bone figure is as required; then salt poultice and bandages are put on top of the broken bone, or a light cloth, and it is wrapped in one cloth, and it is tied to the broken bone so that it does not move; and you turn the limb roundabout, and tighten it gradually, and check each hour if it heals, and if it softens, tighten again; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or inflammation at the location, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and dislocate it, remove the poultice, and address those who came with ways of treatment; then reattach the poultice, and tighten it until it is healed.
of a broken rib
Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large ones behind the back and in the chest, and they do not break easily except due to moisture; and it is well felt at the inquiry with the fingers.
And the restorations are such that you must set the break evenly, as required. Then place the splint, and apply a steady pressure if needed.
And if the break in the ribs is sinking inside, the patient feels intense pain and shortness of breath, similar to pleurisy, for the bone punctures the lining; and the edges are sharp, and immediately he vomits a large amount of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the break outward.
We do not let hot poultices come, unless they have arrived. If they have arrived, then heal it.
And they say that someone should put leeches on the wound to drain pus, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the leech does not attract excess fluid to the wound due to its weak constitution.
And they say that someone should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put bandages between the ribs to even out the swelling around it; then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which does not pierce the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, it is necessary to cut above the broken rib, and it is necessary to put one instrument underneath for support; then you must saw the bone, pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on it, and put it there; and heal the rib while it is necessary to do so, and lie down with it resting where it should be, until it is healed.
of the broken neck
Sometimes the bones in the neck break and do not bend; and similarly with the spine in the back. And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, take notice if their hands are softened, swollen and dead, and cannot be moved or stretched, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel nothing. Know that they are mortally wounded in many positions, but if they do not move and feel when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
And when this happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it will be healed or not, take notice if the feet are softened, and if there is a swelling that is in the hands, and the back suddenly jumps with spasm and discharge involuntarily; and when it is pressed on the belly, it jumps involuntarily. And when it is pressed on the back and he wishes to straighten himself, he cannot. Know that it is mortally wounded: do not labor in its treatment.
If this incident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
And the cure is that you anoint [the abscess] with rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and let them not sleep on the part where they feel pain, until it heals. If any bone is dislocated, it should be covered [with something]; then remove the bone, join the two edges of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat the wound with healing salve until it heals; and if the head of the bone (which is called "the heads of the cow") is broken, take your left hand, put it on the dislocated part and hold it equal to your right hand, then apply the plaster and the linen bandage, if you have them; then tighten [the bandage], and if there are bones protruding, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ankle bone
It often happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there is only a little lessening of the pain at the site; and it extends along the length, bends towards the crotch, causes pain and swelling at the site that breaks.
And the healing is that you extend your hand above [the break], so that you are over the break; and recognize where the break is and what its shape is; and if the break is only at the top, then set the break equal to its natural shape.
And if the break is along the length or it bends inward, make the patient lie on his stomach so that the healing of the break comes to your attention. And when you have set it (the dislocation) right, put an armature on it, then put a splint of wood or horn over it and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the lever below the ribs until the patient is comfortable.
Instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side or back.
If an abscess comes to the surface, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down, and place what we have previously mentioned on it; then return to treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad occurrence; and this is the way.
Of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder is the part that is between the neck and the arm, and if it is fractured, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: of which one is that you take a rod filled with coarse material, in this shape:
And tie the two ends of the rod to each other and raise them up, and place the patient on one seat; then drop the broken arm onto the rod, until it reaches the level, and have a hump in the rod, then raise something heavy above it or the assistants extend it downwards; then place the hands of the molder on the fracture equally, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that you lay the patient on his bed, tie one end of the rod to his neck and command two assistants that one holds the part above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds both ends of the rod, each pulling in their respective directions.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then hold one ligament beneath the break, and above the break, and extend each of the assistants to their part. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must put a moderate ligament beneath the joint, and another towards the flesh, beneath the break; and in the same way if the break is towards the flesh, you must put a light ligament without labor, until the break is equal on the joint, and on the flesh; then make it equal, as necessary, and hold it, unless an abscess does not come.
If an abscess does come, do not hold it for more than seven days, and put a soft cloth in oil of roses on it to soothe the abscess; then hold it, and the method of holding it is that you place the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and put the towel, and hold it onto the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in its correct position, unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
If you doubt that the bone is moving, use wedges, and put a larger and stronger wedge on the break than the others, and have one space between each wedge, and let each wedge be so large that it passes the break two fingers width from each side; then hold onto the wedges, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, with more force but less in pulling away.
And if you see the abscess of the arrowhead, and the constriction, as we have said, during the time that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is cold, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every third day at the suture, to see if pus does not swell or appear at the site, or the inflammation does not come to the limb because it is too narrow. If this happens, proceed as we have said.
If such accidents do not occur, the arrow should not be removed before three or more days, and the patient should lie on their back with their hands on their stomach; and place an equal linen cushion under the arrowhead and watch every hour of the day or night that the limb does not move or the suture is not loose; proceed by the power of medicine and give the food as we have previously stated, so that the food is initially fine; when it starts to recover, let it be coarse. It is customary for the arrow and the thigh to be re-inserted within forty days; then remove and administer baths and ointments for the wound to heal. If the constriction is ugly and swollen, wait longer to remove it, up to one month.
on the fracture of the arm
The arm is made of two bones, which are called the "two shafts"; one is small, and it is the one that forms the elbow; the other is large, and it is the one below, near the little finger; sometimes only the large shaft breaks, or sometimes both break together.
When the small shaft breaks, the restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one breaks, healing is poor and more difficult than when both break together. If it's only the small shaft that breaks, you should slightly extend it gently and straighten it.
And if it's the large shaft that breaks, you should apply more force; extend it up to one cubit, lift the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller finger lower than the others, cross the patient over himself, and place a cubit above him, so that the patient does not feel any discomfort; then stretch out the ministers' arms below their hand, or to the elbow, and have one minister on one side and another on the other above. Then align the broken bone according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
If with the break at the joint, I have spoken of it in the individual chapter; then take care.
If in the beginning of the setting it occurs that abscesses appear, apply one linen cloth made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and lay one cloth carefully over the abscesses, so that they are pacified. Then remove the wax, and place a plaster with milled powder and egg white; then put in sticks (splints), and make the stick of the breakage stronger and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have 7 splints or more in various positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two; and hold the breakage more at the top, and less on the sides, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are over the breakage be soft and moist, not too hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is tied, be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And examine the member and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accidents occur in the member, such as itching that occurs in the member, then you must irrigate the member with hot water until the itching is relieved; and let the member not rest. Then repeat the treatment, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, or similar things, give the advice accordingly.
And if the urine cannot reach the member due to it being too narrow, then you must soften it with oil for a few days, until the urine passes through, and then tighten it.
And if none of the things mentioned above occur in the patient, then do not release him until 20 days or more. Inquire about his hands to his neck, and make sure his neck is even, and watch for movement and tilting, and let him sleep on his back; know that this break will be healed in 30 or 40 days, or perhaps in 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
For at the back of the hand and the fingers, there are few fractures, but it occurs repeatedly many times.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or dislocated, the patient should lie flat on his back, with arms straight and evenly aligned; then he places his hand on a stretched cloth, and the attendant extends the broken bones and aligns them as much as possible; then apply plaster and compresses, if abscess does not occur; then apply a splint according to the severity of the fracture; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is around the side of the sole near the abdomen, make a splint from cloths, and instruct the patient to press his injured hand against it; then bind it with a long piece of cloth, and the splint should be as large as the palm of the hand, and tightened as necessary.
And if the break is at the edge, you must place a splint above and another beneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand and stop the flow of blood between the fingers.
If the break comes on any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, equalize it as necessary; hold it with the sole and, if you see that it is displaced, place a straight splint to lift the break and immobilize it; if the break is in the other fingers (such as the index or another), equalize them and tie them with the healthy finger that follows; tie all of them in one binding, which is enough, or place a splint, such as a thumb-splint; take care in restoring and positioning the abscess, and apply heat to it as I have said.
of the broken leg
The bones of the leg are often broken, and one sees it when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one ties a ligament above the break, and another below. And the patients lie on their face, then each attendant extends their ligament equally to its part; and this is when the break is in the bone.
If the break is near the root of the leg, one ligament should be towards the heel and the others towards the break. And similarly, if it is near the knee, then extend the ligaments on the outside of the knee, and the extension below; then place the bones equally in their two hands, as they are by nature, and then apply the splint, and bind it, without an abscess coming.
And if there is an abscess that heats up, let it cool down first, then return to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in this manner. You must bind over the fracture. That is to say, bind a strong bandage of doubled linen and let the superfluous parts protrude, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg, under the knee, and bring the end of the thread to the top; then turn both the leg and the thigh over the bandage, then put two bars on the break, and put a bar on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth between the leg and the thigh to equalize the binding, then start tying four twists or six on the fracture; and as you go higher on the fracture, loosen it; then hold the two threads that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, bind three bars on top, then return to the bottom of the thread until you come across the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as it is, and let there be no sign of abscess or swelling nor anything similar.
If there is a break, straighten it as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they must be cut off if possible; and if it cannot be done, the limb must be broken and the bone removed; and cure it as we have said until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken so that it can be splinted like in the shoulder or arm; however, in this kind of restoration, the patient does not feel pain.
And know that the thigh is restored within a few days, either less or more, according to the various complexions.
of the street of the knee
Know that in the street of the knee, there is little fracture, but it often bends. And if it breaks, it is not a complete break, only a crack or a fissure, and it causes pain everywhere and without a specific location, and this is felt very much.
And the restoration is when one equalizes the bone that is broken at its ends, as long as it can be assembled; then put the splint, and place a round peg there if needed, and tighten it as required, then recheck all the arrangements mentioned in other breaks, such as an abscess, boil or similar; for each accident, use what is required until it heals.
of the broken leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "shin" and the others are called "fibula"; and it has all the same breakages as in the arm, and therefore the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is entirely the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; and it turns underneath. Then bring extension, make it even, and tie the edges equally; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two fists full of splints that support the leg on both sides and are as long as the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them at this point, and the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should provide a splint as long as the leg, and it should be of wood, and they place the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly make this in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any abscess or other accident; and cure it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but there may be fracture of the bones in the foot and toes, and it has no cure except for compression in various positions.
And if there is a fracture of the bones in the foot, and you see these bones protruding one above the other, place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wants to walk, then place your foot under his, where the bones are raised, and press them back into their places; then apply the splint and padding, and put a small table under the foot with two flat surfaces, then tighten it around the foot in the appropriate way; once you have wrapped the cloths around it, and other things that you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, remove the splint, because you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two [bones] are broken, restore them as we have said in the hand bones; then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and it should be slightly larger; then place a wooden block beneath the fractured one, as I have said, and hold it aligned; and if there are two or more, or more, break each bone separately, place a splint over each one according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the wooden block under the fracture; and ensure that the head of the block is facing the abdomen of the limb, so it covers it well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and treat each accident as necessary.
of the fracture of the wrist bone
When the bone of the womb is broken by natural childbirth, make her sit with her legs apart, then lean her towards the part of the back and hold her from behind; then fill the cavity of nature with cotton and also put as much as a stone in it; then turn the woman, lift up her buttocks little by little, and the cotton will burst out to the entrance of the nature, and the bone will return with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of straw, tie one end of a cord to it, and push the whole bladder into the nature; then blow forcefully into the cord until the bladder is inflated inside: the fracture will return; then fill with cotton and leave it for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the arm is broken in man or woman, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures should not be concealed from him who puts his study and practice to them and attends my book. For the fracture indicates in many ways the right way of restoration: take note of that then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and insert the penis; then wrap it in cloth and leave it for 3 days or more, and it will heal quickly.
with break (or fracture) and wound
For that person who has a fracture with a wound (or break with wound), especially if it is large as the leg bone or shoulder blade or similar, it should be cauterized now, as the cauteries that we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is healed, it should be sealed with vitriol (a disinfectant), if you have no other option, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
And if an abscess bursts, allow the healing to continue until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased; do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause a bad outcome.
And if the bone breaks open in the hollow of the cavity, you must set it gently and slightly extend it.
And if the extension is not aligned for you to set it evenly in your hands, you will need this tool made of iron that has 7 or 8 inches long and its width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror that he holds .3 or 4, depending on what is needed in each cure of breaking bones; and it should be round and slightly larger than a coin so it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and sharp before, and thick from the middle to the tip, like this:
And it is called "palainche", because the crooked neck should be placed on top of the obvious bone; push it once until it returns, and make it even on both sides. If the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must cut the apparent bone, so that the instruments have power.
If you cannot return the bone as we have said, if you have an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, use it to your power; then gnaw that which is left in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Do as much as you can to get it in its place, then moisten one linen cloth in black stiptic wine, or if it's in summer, moisten the cloth in water; do not put any oil-soaked cloth or anything over the wound that could cause corruption and putrefaction; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times have foolish surgeons done this, causing death or corruption of the patient sometimes; and let the bandages be softer and more pliable than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad incident will come about, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, do not put splints on it; but wrap around instead, in place of splints, hard bandages and bind them. And when after one day or two you see pus boiling at the wound, remove completely what you had placed on top, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
And the limbs should be prepared in such a way that the splints slide downwards gently.
And if they pass many days without healing and continue to swell again, know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must carefully open the wound and remove all the dislocated fragments causing the pain.
If a fistula or corruption comes to the place, you must treat it according to what is said in the chapter before this one. And when the bone is broken and opened above the limb, such as the bone of the shin or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not draw it out; for many times death may come, but leave it until it can heal by itself; perhaps a charrion cart will be needed after twenty or thirty days. Then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
broken bones that come on the suture (joint)
We often come after health following the break, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a pitiful sight to see the shape of the limb; and unfortunately, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take good care of it afterwards: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saracocola, acacia, and similar others, taking any one of these substances or all together and boil them in a stiptic wine or with an abundance of egg or with oil; then place the mixture in a bandage and apply pressure and do not remove it for many days; then dislocate it, and start another, until the nodulation is removed; or you hold above a piece of wood well made; for the properties of wood are that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, chop it off, and make the excess apparent; or you shave it at any razor until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
When the fracture of the bone is set and remains afterwards, the limbs become weak and delicate; this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or due to excessive swelling; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, making it weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body strong, until the flesh multiplies in him; then provide baths, and give him joy and rest; next apply salve to the member, so that the salve attracts great nutrients, and often apply cold water to it, until the nutrients reach the member; and return it to its natural shape.
the twisted limb after health
When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the limb anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and this practice is condemned, and it causes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the knots and tortures are fresh, they must be softened with hot water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, root radishes, sweet clovers, and similar things; and you should make a soothing plaster using dyaquilon well-made, and take musk from vismalve, mix it with gelyn grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster; or you can take greased figs, grind them with corn bran, and similar medicines that alleviate pain.
And sometimes the knots are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. Movement should be introduced to the limb every hour.
And if the tortures are hardened and strengthened like stone, requiring surgery, it must be covered up to the bone, at the subtle incision; and cotton and wool should be placed in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be repositioned with care.
For if it is delayed, the limb swells, and in case it is placed back at its joint; therefore, it should not be moved before it is swollen: many times this causes pus and other pain.
Throughout, when this happens, you sanitize the patient, then let him be, until all abscesses are appeased; then moisten the limb with hot water and oil, then gently move it, and care for each member as care comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
of jawbones
1. Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous: It happens that the jaws are dislocated in two ways: either they are partly dislocated from their place and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards down, causing saliva to flow from the mouth which it cannot hold, and it cannot close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can return in various positions more often.
And if it is complete and finished, you must reset it quickly, without hesitation;
And in such a manner that the minister holds the patient's head and pushes the thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other hand should be open, to make it even; and instruct the patient to soften and move their jaws from all sides.
And bring the thumb equal, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is difficult, similarly, if it is both jaws together, apply hot water and oil to loosen them gently; do not rush to forcefully move, as we have said.
And when they (dislocations) are set back in place equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed well, cover it with a cloth moistened with rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with several strips.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his arms be placed between two pillows, so that it does not move to the right or left, nor force itself at all, but take light meat, until the pain is gone, and the jaws are tied.
and then let him eat lightly whatever he wants, and not to work at all in opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well tied and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be reset in an hour and are not returned to their place, fever and usual sweats occur, and perhaps abdominal swelling, and possibly vomiting bile.
When you see this, therefore, know that it is disaster; and many times the one in whom it occurs dies within eight days.
of the collarbone   (metaphorical usage, meaning "neck" or "throat")
The splint cannot dislocate from the side within the ribcage and is dislocated outside once at the hip, and it is felt clearly.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint with your palm and it will return; then put a splint and bandage over it and hold it in place.
and the joint that is toward the back cannot dislocate; if it does, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put a splint and bandage over it and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And likewise, bring back the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
Dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in four ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the part near the shoulder joint below; and the second way is to the part of the buttock; and by chance it may dislocate above, but this rarely happens.
And never dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and never dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocate downwards towards the axilla, especially in those who have little flesh, for it leaps out quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it leaps out slightly, and returns slightly.
Sometimes happens to some men percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must verify it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when they move downwards towards the shoulder, and you should distinguish between a diseased shoulder and a healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. You will find a hollow in the shoulder blade and beneath the shoulder to the touch of the shoulder head, just as there is an eye socket; and the patient cannot return their hand to its place, nor make any movements.
And if it is dislocated upwards, it will not be hidden, for you can feel it clearly by touching.
And this method of dislocation is not always easy to reset, when it is new, or if the child is ill.
The minister lifts the patient's hand high, then puts your fist underneath it, and pulls the joint up forcefully to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it high, then puts it underneath; quickly it will come back.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few hours, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and they should be given a soothing and calming balm, such as a decoction of elderflower and fenugreek in water, and it should be applied.
Then the patient should lie down on their back and place a piece of even linen under the affected shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then the healer places his foot on the cloth and gently lifts the head of the shoulder, pulling the arm of the patient.
and another assistant holds the head of the patient still below it; that shoulder will return immediately. If you see it dislocate again in this way:
and have one man who is larger than the patient be present. He should be positioned straight alongside the cost side, and push the shoulder of the patient down under his own, lifting the affected shoulder upward so that the patient hangs in an "A" shape. And another minister pulls the hand of the patient towards the abdomen. If the patient is too weak, he can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is also pulled in another way: and that one drives a long needle into the ground so that the head is as round as a pea, but neither too large nor too thin; Then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft wool beneath, and the patient should be lying along the length of the bed; then his hand on the affected side should be extended towards the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, perform this treatment: take one stick of two hands in length and four fingers in width, which has its head round for easy insertion deep inside the anus, according to this shape:
Then tie the head of the stick with cloth to prevent the patient from being scalded, then insert the stick into the anus of the patient; extend one arm along the stick, and bind the shoulder to the stick, and the forearm at the end of the hand, then place one leg on one side of a bench, and let the other side hang loose; the dislocation will be reduced immediately.
And when it is inside, no matter how, you must put a sphere of cotton equal in size under the anus, then place a plaster filled with powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, all over the shoulder and around; then hold it down beneath the anus, turn the string around the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
And it is necessary that he eat little food, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is hardened and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come or for another reason, then you must administer three cauterizations as stated in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you have done all of this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve to the shoulder is cut or stretched out or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the hip and limbs, front or back, is caused by force and extension of hands, and other means are administered for its treatment; it should be cured until it heals.
And after the healing, if there is still pain in the limb and slow movement, the patient should use baths several times until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost   (This line seems incomplete, as it does not seem to follow the pattern of translation from the previous lines.)
Know that the joint of the arm is dislocated at points, and it comes back at points; and if it becomes dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired because it can be seen clearly and felt clearly; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick arm with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset the dislocation in such a way that the abscesses come out easily, for if the abscess comes out, it would be difficult to set; and perhaps it cannot be set completely from all sides, especially when it is at the back; it is worth more than other dislocations, and it causes greater pain, and perhaps death follows.
And the restoration is as follows, when it can be returned to its state, extend your hand to both of his hands; and stretch out his arms, and place his hands opposite each other according to the bone joints outside and inside, and push the joint back to its sockets or to the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when you fold your hand over your other hand, and push against the bone joint that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is necessary for two people to extend the arm, and one person should hold it still during the extension; then turn the arm from both sides, and when you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it.
And when the master joins the joint to his hand, he applies some oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint back into place until it returns.
And when it is in place, he puts on a plaster made with egg white and applies pressure to form it, then straps the arm around the patient's neck for several days, then unstraps it.
And if the joint is held in place, you unbind it and leave it. If you see that the joint is not holding well, you repeat the plaster and binding, and leave it like that for some days until it is firmly set; then you unbind it again.
And if it feels pain after the repositioning of the joint, and it becomes motionless, then bathe it well and rub it, and press until it is soothed; or you place a sheep's grease nail on the jointure, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter the bath. and when it swells, rub the jointure gently, then place the nail back on, and then enter into the bath; and do so two or three times, until it is healed; and if you see, place warm dampened wool with butter on it, and strap it; it will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand joint, and its reset is easy, more than other jointures, nonetheless it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour when it is dislocated, before the joint is swollen or there comes an abscess hot.
And the repositioning is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and mirror the hand so it aligns, with its palm above the appearance of the jointure, and push it until it returns.
Furthermore, you must watch to see if it is in its place; then make the patient lay the back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, the patient should place the back of their hand on the table, and the one who is helping should place their hand above the affected joint area. If it returns to its place now, that's good.
And if not, strain with plasters or soothing poultices the abscesses and let them remain in place to start healing.
If it cannot tolerate that, and you cannot put it back in place after any days, the dislocated joint will remain displaced.
And it is not advisable for the patient to be forced to move his hand until the hand is healed, and cannot grasp anything entirely: therefore know that the nerves are severed or the arteries; there is no other remedy but to force by fire cautery in this case, and by chance, nothing else has value.
And when the hand is at its place, put a splint on it as we have said, then bind and leave for 5 days, then unbind and leave in this manner.
If it cannot be moved well and there is no pain, moist with warm water and rub until it heals.
Of the dislocation of the fingers on the hand
The fingers on the hand are sometimes dislocated on one side or the other, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm itself;
Then push the finger back into its place, and hold the head of the finger while you bend it toward the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for two days, and then make it straight on the third day; bind it tightly, as we have said, and loosen it by a day, and move it, and tie it again; do this often until it is straight;
And similarly (do) the same, if it is dislocated from the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and similarly do when it is dislocated from another place.
And for the dislocation of the small of the back
When the small of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many such dislocations without a cure, death quickly approaches the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions jump involuntarily, and they cannot be held; many times, any member is softened, either both legs or both arms or one.
And many times the spine is affected in four parts; that which affects the rear part is called "gibbosities":
The cure is that you check if the gibbosities have come from childhood; if there is no treatment or healing from it entirely.
And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the ancient ways of cure used to speak in great words, but it is not profitable in all cases.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the case of the illness that precedes, there is no remedy nor healing;
and similarly that which comes straight in two sides, can only be cured by the one coming from behind, as I say;
And it is that the patient should be extended on an even surface, and have restraint beneath him, so he does not bleed.
Then insert one poker into the head on the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a cord under the patient's buttocks, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
And two ministers know the cords, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two pokers.
And let them be tightly closed, the torches as we have said, and the hands place their palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a table 3 feet long and rounded on the top, and place the patient on their side. Then push the edge of the table underneath the opening and place the middle part of the table on the spine. And the attendant places their feet on the other end of the table and presses hard until it returns to its place; if you see that it does not return, you do it with the tournet that turns by hand.
And it is that you insert two needles into the patient's head from one arm and two others in the feet, and there should be a palm's space between each needle.
and there should be one suture in each needle, or turn the needle, and the needles should be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between two needles there should be one moving needle, as with a thread, and in two moving needles there should be two small needles of a palm's length for turning the needle.
and then tie the thread that is among the needles to the needle in the head, and the other thread to the needle at the feet, and each of the ministers turns the needle along the whole length, and the master sets the spine even as we have said.
And when it is equalized (the dislocated joint), place a dry plaster with egg white on top, then press and then apply an iron rod of three feet long, which penetrates the swelling and the healthy part of the vertebrae, then tie it with a cord as we have said, and use gentle massage until it is healed;
if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the rod as we have said before; and sometimes they administer a piece of wood.
and sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine, and it is thought to be dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, so one should not have presumption: by chance it might bring death.
of the dislocations of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder and the arm joints come out of place only by dislocations themselves, not otherwise as with other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four ways: inside and outside, front and back; and more on the inside than elsewhere, and less so in front and behind.
And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer, and the injured knee joint is wider than the healthy, and the injured person cannot bend their knee in fire. and it is the loin that is dislocated inflamed with abscess, because the knee joint comes there.
And the sign of that one who suffers from this condition is that this event happens contrary to what was mentioned before.
And the signs of that one whose leg is swollen as mentioned before, are that it is not doubled in the knee, and does not feel pain when bent, and if you wish to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and holds back its urine, and the ankle inflates, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of that one whose condition is at the back, are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it double, and this leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle becomes softened, and the head of the thighbone is beneath the ribs.
The re-alignments of this similarity of dislocation are such that you should observe if the dislocations are old and remain in their position without any treatment; and it is not appropriate for there to be any assumption about it.
For one whose dislocation is recent, and there are four types of dislocation, you should hurry that you turn the joint, push it inward and outward, and move it left and right; by chance if it returns, no further treatment is necessary.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare one strong attendant and hold the leg firmly with two hands or tie one rope above the knee; And another minister extends his hand over it in such a manner that he pushes his hands beneath the buttocks, then tightens a rope-like thing on the thigh; and another grips the head of the thigh with the rope.
And they all extend from above and below at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If the shoulder is not dislocated, a cure for its condition should be applied. When the dislocation is at the front, you must hold the patient on their healthy side, then put the rope around the root of the thigh, and the limb that is underneath the angle, then pull the rope upward towards the angle, and towards the shoulder.
Then take another minister and grasp the large limb of the sick thigh and extend it outward in this manner: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the sick leg should be extended two feet more than the others;
Then it should be hung from a post by the neck, and there should be two long arms below; then command one minister to embrace the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient who will embrace the thigh, as the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is on the outside, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has gout, and draw a string over the diseased leg properly, and also over the foot.
Then insert two needles, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one needle between the thighs of the patient in this manner; And let it be planted with moist cloths around it, so that it does not hurt the patient; then each minister should approach him and place his hand on the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place it on a table and press as we have said in the previous section, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be straightened quickly, as I have said; and place the hand on the opposite side of the injured angle, then press with the other hand and pull towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back (of the body), it should not be extended downward, nor raised up on earth, but rather it should be as when a hunchback is dislocated at the back, as we have said in the laying of two hunchbacks. and it (the affected limb) should be on its face, and the ligament extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed strongly against the joint at the table.
and it (the affected limb) will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, place a support (or brace), and bind it with a bandage, so that the hunchback does not move.
And it rests for 3 or 4 days, then dislocate, place a splint on it; and if they are even, hold steady as before, and let them be. For 3 days; then dislocate, and make it move well, until the limb is comfortable.
of the dislocation in the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside and out, backward; and never forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and his foot on your feet;
then take his thigh with both hands and pull it back between your hands, then bend the two sides of the thigh into a shape; and another minister extends his foot until the thigh returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends easily at the knee.
And apply the plaster on top, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly for three or four days, then dislocate it; and let the patient not walk at all until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it heals.
about the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the symptoms are that the ankle is swollen, and tenderness in the area where it is dislocated:
And the relocations are light, and it should be gently extended to the hands when only swollen.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit straight, and hold one minister (assistant) by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then lift it up and push the foot upwards strongly;
and do this twice as we said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, continue the work, because it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground, and make a firm hole in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around it so that the patient does not bleed;
Then anoint the ministers the thigh, and another minister extends the leg at the hands or at one joint, so that it lies across the neck of the leg; Then each minister extends equally, and the passer-by should be close between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while stretching him;
Then the master puts both hands on the dislocation and another minister anoints the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly;
And when it is at the point, apply the plaster and bandage on top, press firmly, bind the leg to the foot, and watch the nerves that are above the back of the calf, so that the binding is not too tight.
Then let it rest for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments soften, hold them tight; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for 4 days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess swells up, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
of the two [shoulders]
When both shoulders are dislocated, they must be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any way near the back of the hip, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight up, and place your foot over the affected joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns to its place.
And when it is even and there is no opening, place a two-legged table under the foot, press firmly on it, and leave it for four hours, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When wound comes with the dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times patients die.
Do not be hasty in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, do not be bold.
and apply at the beginning of soothing abscesses warmly, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope for health. And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place, thus allowing the abscess to heal;
When the limb is in place, administer remedies to calm the abscess and treat the wound as necessary, using dry poultices.
If there is a dislocation with a fracture and small bones are displaced, set the bones and perform what has been said for simple diseases.
And guard against entering into fear, as I have said, for it avails you according to your Creator, and by the skill of your weapon and body. Amen
