Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The pain in the joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate the whole body, and the pain in the feet, is commonly called gout by doctors.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, children of learning, I have finished this book for you, which is the culmination of the science of medicine, by the grace of God, and by the encouragement of my students, and by the proofs of my experience, it is clear to me that I must explain this treatise to you, which is part of my art, so to speak, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For our region and our time, surgery is a dangerous and private art, for it is fraught with peril to the science itself; and the vision of it is almost extinct; and it remains only with some few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change almost everything and even makes worse the errors and doubts that exist until it is understood that the true essence of the art lies in the knowledge and the power of the same.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I know that I have followed this treatise in the order of exposition and declaration, and by abbreviation; and that it is necessary to add to the declaration the forms of the cautery instruments and other instruments of the work, as well as the preparation of them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The great reason why no wise man in our time finds good art in surgery, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it requires a learned actor who has been exercised in the science of anatomy, knowing the structure of the limbs and their shapes, and the joints and their separation; and the knowledge of bones, nerves, and vessels, and their number, and their color; and the pulse of the veins and the quiet of the arteries, and the seat of the disease.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And thus Hippocrates said that he who has no name is nothing, more so in small works, and most of all in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	As I have already said at the beginning of this book; he seen many die from the errors of those who are not learned in anatomy, and who fall into error because of their lack of knowledge in this science and their experiments
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For example, I saw a foolish and inept physician who performed an incision on the groin of a woman, and who cut several arteries in the groin so that a great quantity of blood flowed out, and the woman died between her thighs.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	I also saw another physician who took hold of a stone that had been in a man’s belly for a long time, and the stone was large, and he brought it out with a piece of the gut, and the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	I have already mentioned this, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who was taking care of a duke from our land for surgery, and he gave him a black slave who had a fractured thigh bone; and in his ignorance, the physician extracted the fracture from the socket, with sponges and bandages, with great force, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he left according to his desires, and he bound him, and he left him for several days and commanded that he be left alone; and thus the thighbone perished.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	I went to see him and I found that he had loosened the bandage, and peace and quiet had returned and the pain had vanished
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption had already spread throughout the limb, for it was unable to contain it, and it continued to spread throughout the limb until the disease itself became imminent.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I also saw another physician who performed an incision on a cancerous tumor, and he opened it up several days later, and he found that the tumor had increased in size, and that the disease had spread throughout the body
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that cancer is pure melancholy humor, and it does not suffice to remove it from the body, but that it must be removed from the limb in which it has settled, because it is the host of all the other humors in the body
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, children, you must know that the art of surgery is divided into two parts: the one that is associated with health, and the one that is dangerous in the greatest precautions
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already spoken of this throughout this book concerning the operations in which there is error and fear; for you must guard against these and leave those who are foolish to their own devices, so that they do not find fault with you or bring you into disrepute
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take the sacred arms in request for God's help, and the sacred sick in exhortation and encouragement.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Therefore use the best way through God's grace to achieve salvation and blessed posterity, and lay aside the deadly diseases of difficult healing, and remain with the sacred arms of those who inspire fear, so that your satisfaction in your faith and your trust in his name does not vanish: for may there remain to your glory, and more in heaven and beyond the saints.</end_of_turn>
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed, I have already said in several places:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“There is no medicine for a bad disease, so that no doctors should be called by that name.”</start_of_turn>
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already finished this book according to three chapters.</start_of_turn>
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.</start_of_turn>
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head downwards, concerning the forms of instruments and the utensils of cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.</start_of_turn
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.</start_of_turn
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning swelling and perforation, and wounds, ulcers, and the extraction of arrows, all categorized and ordered according to the forms of instruments.</start_of_turn
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.</start_of_turn
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, and care of fractures and similar cases; categorized from the head downwards, and according to the forms of instruments.</start_of_turn
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery with fire and acute medicine and reminder of the operation.</start_of_turn
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that one begins the treatise of the entire book.</start_of_turn
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That I have said what is the quality of the instruments of that cautery and the documents of them, and in what combination it is prohibited to cauterize.</start_of_turn
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the instruments of that cautery and their documents is a long and profound speech, subtle for science, and a secret hidden; and that many great scholars have spoken of it, and they have disagreed with each other, and I am content with a small part of their speeches, fearing the length of the discourse.</start_of_turn
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that cautery conforms to all universal completion except for two completions, which are caudal completions of its matter.</start_of_turn
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caudal and dry completion of the matter, discordance appears; for some say that cautery is useful for that, and others say that it is harmful for that, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the disease be both caudal and dry at the same time.</start_of_turn
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And some say that for cautery is useful in every caudal and dry disease that appears in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of a man with the humidity of the air to the completion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say concerning this speech that I have already experienced in some way.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	May be, however, that I have not yet spoken of that which has already been exposed and exercised in the chapter of cautery after practice, and to know the diversity of the temperaments of men and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of these, and their accidents, and the space of time of these.</start_of_turn
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May be in other completions, you are not afraid, and more so in cold and wet diseases, for already all doctors agree on that, and they do not disagree in the use of cautery in those.</start_of_turn
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that the secret of the care of cautery with fire and the goodness of it, is about cautery with burning medicine, for the fire is simple, the action of which reaches only the member which is cauterized and does not touch the other member adjacent to it except for a small document.</start_of_turn
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	For the action of burning medicine reaches only that in the members from which it is removed, and it makes it come out in the diseased member of difficult healing very strong.</start_of_turn
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	For the fire, for its subtlety and its preciousness, does nothing but what we already know by experience and by the length of our service in studying the art concerning the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused for the length of this speech, for it is not fitting for me to speak of such a secret in this place to you.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	The time is right, children, for you to desist from cautery and rest for the best part of the day.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is convenient at all times, so that it does not suffer for the sudden occurrence of pain, for it is immersed in the support of water which is applied to the cautery and which is more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, which are strong and painful, for they do not suffer from delay so that it is feared that those which come later will be malicious, which is greater than a slight neglect of the time.</end_of_turn>
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	I do not know of other treatments, or children, except for the common people and fools among the doctors, so that at that disease which is healed by cautery it is not a shame at all times, and rest is sufficient.</end_of_turn>
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not that they give it because of water, for cautery is nothing but a medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of pain.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But indeed cautery often surpasses medicine by its pleasure and worth and greatness of the Lord.</end_of_turn>
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that your disease will return at some time of the day, according to the composition of the disease and the location of the disease, and the virtue of them, and what is prepared in the body from the accumulation of superfluities in it, and what is obtained from it in its acquisition in food and other things; but if the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member of few superfluities and humors, like for example cautery of the tooth for pain and the like, it is possible that in it the said pain will not return, even though it is done in small quantities.</end_of_turn
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And indeed the vulgar saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and is a treacherous saying, not for those who understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that takes advantage of medicine or any other cause except for cautery itself.</end_of_turn
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is on the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is true only when the methods of treatment of certain diseases are administered, and those medicines do not benefit, and in the end when the cause is administered one has cautery, and takes advantage of that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And indeed from here it can be said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the vulgar people and the fools of the doctors have.</end_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and I do not say anything except for the equality of gold and the fineness of its substance.</end_of_turn
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And I say that the location of the cautery does not make it worse, as it is not absolutely true, for I have already seen that it does not do anything except in some rare cases, and that cautery with gold is better than with iron indeed as they say; but indeed when you make cautery with fire from gold, it is not your business, for it is ignited according to the quantity you wish for the roughness of the gold, and it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it too much it will consume the gold by the fire, and if you take off some of the gold there will remain only some scales because the artisan cuts for the occupation of that.</end_of_turn
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason it is useful to make cautery with iron that you put on more lightly and more cautiously to the rectification of the operation.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those which are between the feet to be omitted, so that I avoid demanding what you wish from me.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for the pain of the head from frigidity and humidity.</end_of_turn
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers to the humidity and frigidity about the accidental cause of which it is said to be the cause of soda and multiple fluxes of the rheumatic kind, applied to the head to the parts of the limbs and the nails, and multiple sleep, and toothache and swelling, and universally of any disease that comes from frigidity, even as paralysis, sopor and apoplexy, and the like.</end_of_turn
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The way of this cautery is this, that first of all it commands the patient to evacuate with medical laxatives the head for three or four nights, according to the excess of the virtue of the disease and the age of the patient and his custom.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And it commands him to remove the hair from the head with a razor, and to make him sit on a fallen bench and place his hands on his feet.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place your thumb close to the base of the nose between the eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Moreover, when the physician confirms that the affected area is the knee, he should grasp it with his thumb and index finger, and with the cautery he should burn the olive oil of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place it over the area that is being cauterized with the thumb, so that it descends, with your hand being slightly constrained, and you will rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then withdraw your hand slightly and support the area, and if you see that some quantity of the bone is already exposed, as much as the quantity of barley grains, then raise your hand again, and if you do not turn your hand away from the instrument, do so from the other side, while it is still cold, until it is seen from the bone as I have said to you
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a little salt and dissolve it on the area and keep it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And place a bandage around the area bordering on the edge and keep it on until the burn mark of the fire is destroyed
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area with the usual medicines until it is healed
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And indeed, when the disease remains open, then a brace should be taken so that it is better and more healing
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I say to you all that the bone must be cauterized until the bone itself, and that the cautery must be held in place until all parts of the substance of the bone are consumed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And thus be the matter of the bone that is tough, and be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And I say that it should be cauterized until the marrow is reached, because it strengthens the bone more when it is fractured than when it is whole, and this is the way of allaying the pain of the small bones:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And it is estimated that the vapors of the head escape from that area.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the disease remains open for a long time, and finally be cured when it has solidified
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two methods of cautery in many people, except in fools out of fear; and leave it to you, it is better for your health, when it is possible, that the head should be developed by the continuation of its functions as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the disease is of a cold nature
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first method is better and more beneficial for me; and from this one and from that work I have seen that it is healthier.
Capitol segon.	End of text.
Del cauteri del cap.	The end of the text is missing from the provided context.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there is chronic and lasting pain and that which is in the disease is prolonged, and you use herbs, poultices, cataplasms, plasters, mustard seeds, barley, millet, and other similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that accounts for it and does not benefit from them in any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the disease is of strong formation in its nature; and it is not cold and finds little heat, then you should cauterize with another cautery, leaving a little space between them.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And cauterize that over the heel of the foot with the cautery until the marrow is fractured
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Fracture the bone and uncover from the bone the quantity that we have mentioned, and cauterize that with a cautery in the posterior part of the head in the area where wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And rest your hand on it like this, and do not uncover the bone, for the disease finds great pain from that other than from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I say that this cautery in this place is better than the cautery with which the nails of the head and the occipital bone are cauterized, for it is more subtle; and this is the way of doing it.
Capitol ters.	End of text.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of ancient emigration cauteries.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the part of the head there is sudden pain, or is prolonged pain in the heel, evacuate with medicines the head somewhat loosened, and administer the other care that I have mentioned in the preceding diseases; and all this without benefit, for the cautery in these cases is done in two ways: either with acute burning medicine or with an instrument
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Better is the cautery with burning medicine than that with which you take a piece of aloe and burn its exterior and remove the extremities of both heads
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And immediately prick the area of pain in the temple with a lancet as far as it penetrates the flesh without leaving the corden exposed, as it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And hold over the area for a while to prevent constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the ligature and take hold of the pulse, and leave the bandage for two or three days, and rest over the area immersed in broth until the area feels better
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And care for the area until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, I can write to you about other medicines that combat these which I have written about in the treatise on combatting medicines
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed according to this manner: fire for cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called closed nails, where the head is like a nail with a curvature in which there is a small elevation in the middle of the area
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And rest over the area of pain, and hold your hand—so that the surrounding area is not scorched by the cautery—and move the fire slowly over the area.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood scorched by the corden is great in relation to the total, elevate your hand so that the artery is not scorched, which would prevent the flow of blood
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And soak the area in salt water and rest it over the area, leaving it for three days; then rest the area covered with a bandage, and care for the area until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the cuticle according to the cautery, and keep the incision from the artery in this part, which is not an old wound.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cautery of ancient wound
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you have cured the ancient wound as we have said of the preceding care, and as we have said in the division of diseases, and you do not benefit from the care, sometimes for the disease does not reach the amount we have said of the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then leave the fire of the cautery on the cuticle until it is whitened, because it signifies over the area of pain along the length of which is the greatest part of the digit, or whatever; and remove your hand for a while and hold it over the wound while you are incuding the artery and until you reach the bone
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to take care of the continuity of the mandible, which is unfortunate because of chewing, and that the nerves are not scorched and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood of the artery that is being lanced, because in the lancing there is fear, and especially for that one who ignores what he does and is reckless; leave the operation in his hands from the beginning
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to remind you of the regiment of the flow of blood in the accident of the artery according to their manner, in the place of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not benefit from this cautery and see that the patient can tolerate the pain, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and care for the wound until it is healed
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on stretching of the artery with two nails, which is better cautery and more comfortable
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery of the pains of the heel bones
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the heel there is pain from cold and is cured by lacative causes and by the other care that I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then leave the fire of the cautery, which is called puncture, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And immediately prick close to the ignition, and be careful around the entire heel as if rolling, or in the circumference of any abscess if the pain is in any part
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with you I cauterize from the root of the heel slowly rather than abruptly because you can see the area better
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you have cauterized ten times in the whole heel, and what is that? And care for the area until it is healed
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de turtura.	From cautery of turmeric.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turmeric, which is cured by cautery, is nothing other than the spices which cause inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.</end_of_turn>
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the spice which must be dried or cause spasm of the nerves.</end_of_turn>
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured that spice of turmeric, and you have plastered it and anointed it, and you have applied compresses, do not eat your cure until you have cauterized the patient three times: the first to remove the hair, the second a little bit lower down, and the third to join the two lips together.</end_of_turn
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And rest the cautery for the opposite of the painful part, because moisture does not suffice except in the part that appears to be healed.</end_of_turn
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way of cautery is that you cauterize that which is at the root of the limb plus slightly above the nail of the toe, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger without going beyond. Stop your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the matter of the spice of turmeric has been consumed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the way of cautery, and it is the spice of the surgeon, the form of which is like a sawtooth.</end_of_turn
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More importantly, that a little goes a long way; and cover with them instead of excessive thickness a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And finally cure the area with that which is denant proceeds until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vii.	The end.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	From cautery of ancient apoplexy.</start_of_turn>
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexia is ancient and you have cured that which we have said, and you do not fear your medicine and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that which is four times: on all the nails of the foot; at the root and the middle of the toe, as we have said; and on the heel.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The way of cautery is sufficient as it is said.</start_of_turn
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and like that it should be cured with that which proceeds.</start_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	The end.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	From cautery for forgotten pain caused by inflammation.</start_of_turn
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover that the patient is given at the beginning large herbs and pills that serve to mitigate them.</start_of_turn
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And like that cover the head of the patient completely and stop the bleeding of them by covering them with the plaster described in the treatise on plastering.</start_of_turn
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And stop any herbs, for that is the way of cautery.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it like that which has already been said.</start_of_turn
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if for these healthy people it is good; and if not, then do three cauteries on the back of the foot, which are dependent on the part most above the head within the part furthest from the heel.</start_of_turn
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And stop between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and like that cure the cautery with that which proceeds.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	More if you wish to become addicted and the patient is able, then do the cautery at the middle of the toe; and if you wish greater addiction, then cauterize that which is over the two nails.</start_of_turn
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Like that cure when it is healed; and let the cautery olive oil according to the manner described before.</start_of_turn
Capitol .ix.	The end.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	From cautery of carbuncles and mollification of all the body.</start_of_turn
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in mitigation of the head with herbs and with that which has been said; and like that cover the head of the patient, and like that cauterize that which is at the middle of the toe, and that which is over all the nails of the foot, and that which is over the back of them, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the heel.</start_of_turn
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of mitigation of the body of the limbs that the patient is able and the disease is strong, then cauterize that which is four times over the vertebrae of the buttocks, and afterwards like that cover until it is consumed by the turmeric, and remove your hand.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this one is cautery oil.
Capitol .x.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	These sentences deal with the treatment of gout, a painful inflammatory condition affecting the joints caused by the accumulation of uric acid crystals in the joints. The physician recommends the use of cautery oil as part of the treatment.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The cautery is not performed directly on the inflamed area but on the area affected by the inflammation.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore modify the head of the patient at the beginning and at the end of the treatment, and the other care that we have indicated in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of the medicines
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer from the medicines, then give astringents and bitter substances to serve as modification, giving this for several days, to the benefit of the food
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then remove the head of the patient, and then cauterize that which is like a cautery in the middle of the head according to the manner mentioned before, and on another side of the head do the same.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that which we have said, having paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the thigh and the vertebrae of the loin
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this one is cautery oil as before
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	Even if the patient is a child, pause the cautery cautiously according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	These sentences deal with the treatment of gout, a painful inflammatory condition affecting the joints caused by the accumulation of uric acid crystals in the joints. The physician recommends the use of cautery oil as part of the treatment.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	These sentences deal with the treatment of melancholy, a mental state characterized by persistent low mood, loss of interest, and difficulty concentrating
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and great inflammation, then cauterize that which we have said is to be cauterized, having paralyzed it
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive superfluidity declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humous, then give him to drink that which modifies the head of the patient as we have said before
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then remove the head of the patient, and then make a proper incision downwards to the circle, and remove that which is in the middle of the head
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be placed in a state of collapse and held entirely still
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And pause the liniment; and it is more advisable to bind against sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And burn that over the fire for moderate heat for measure, which will give relief when it is put on the patient
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then pour oil into the middle of the head in the circle, and keep it within until it is warmed up
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give the patient water every day for a week, with the other remedies of the good things which are to be kept within until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that which makes small points according to the best of your ability, but keep your hand over the area with a cautery in order, this is a kind of cautery which moistens the head with equality
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And pause that corner inwards in border or in gray of grease
Capitol .xii.	These sentences deal with the treatment of epilepsy, a neurological condition characterized by recurrent seizures
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the cautery of water descending into the nose.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is reported to you that water has descended into the nose for the symptoms mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water that which modifies the head of the patient, and keep him away from all humors
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him vomit in water for four days
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command him to keep his head bowed, and cauterize that which is like a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize twice on two temples if this is the beginning of the vomiting of water in two nostrils, or once if it is the beginning of the vomiting of water in one nostril
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Burn all the veins and arteries which are left of the cord; and let the cauteries be on that length in the breadth of the temples
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep him away from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see fluxes of blood, stop any medicine that is in your power
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I say that I know the wisdom which is in the extraction of arrows and in the abstinence from those and the care for the flux of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Each vein is cauterized at the junction of two bones with two cautery instruments which are produced in this way
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.</end_of_turn>
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and adhere to the veins and arteries which are in the external part of the head and it is verified that these are superfluous fatuous phlegmas, then cauterize that which we have recounted in the chapter concerning the beginning of water in the belly of the uterus, and that in the middle of the head and two cauteries at the junction of two temples, and two cauteries at the junction of two bones.</end_of_turn>
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if the digestion is insufficient, then cauterize that which is in all the area of the heel on the edge of the heel with a small cautery.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of the stench of the nose.</end_of_turn
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your physician has said that which we have said in the division and does not profit from your medicine, then you must approach him and give him to drink for three nights the broth of the patient; and approach his head and cauterize that which is between the middle and the olive.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And approach cauterizes that which is between the claw and two cauteries over the two heels so that the hair is cut off a little.</end_of_turn
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And take care that the arrow does not burn that.</end_of_turn
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And concerning the cautery of the claw, this is its form.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery of the softening of the eyelids of the eyes.</end_of_turn
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this crescent; and this is its form:</end_of_turn
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize over the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries throughout, and let them lengthen from the temples.</end_of_turn
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the eyebrow.</end_of_turn
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much your hand with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eye when the eyelashes have become converted to the parts downwards and put your hand on the eye.</end_of_turn
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes of the eye are converted to the downwards parts and put your hand on the eye, cauterize in those two ways, that is to say with a burn or with medicine that burns.</end_of_turn
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you burn them with fire, command the patient to drink giving him to drink those things which make the eyelashes lengthen, such as vinegar, until they are prolonged and equal; and if you put them in, strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not painful until the eyelashes are born.</end_of_turn
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore when they are born and equal, command the patient to rest his head on the belly and approach over the eye of the patient with your hand, and touch, with a signal which is like the figure of a dead leaf, and let the beginning of the signal be near the eyelashes.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And approach keep the eye covered in ointment of gum or in plaster over the eye.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And approach is the cautery of which this is the form.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And approach cauterize over the figure which you have signed, little by little, in small veins, until the surface of the cord which is like a dead leaf is consumed, all in appearance properly.</end_of_turn
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of the completion of the work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the eyelashes of the eye already being raised beyond the puncture of the eye.</end_of_turn
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore raise your hand and leave it for three days, and approach keep over it the eye with a border until the scar is healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then attend to that which is burning within until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Then if it returns for any cause, promptly administer nourishment and soften the pulse, for the hour will provide another opportunity to apply the cautery over the whole area as was done previously.</end_of_turn>
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	Then if the pain is in the pulse, leave it alone, elevate the limb naturally to its rightful place, and let the swelling subside, for the pain will disappear.</end_of_turn
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Then apply medicine to burn away what causes the patient to groan, for it commands the patient to rest their limbs until they are prolonged and softened, and promptly provide support with a linen bandage in the shape of a feather of mercury.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And promptly take from the patient a draught of wine and vinegar.</end_of_turn> namely.</end_of_turn> or what is in it, and mix these three causes together, make fasting for it so that it is not chilled; and immediately expand from this over the bandage which is applied thus in the form of a feather of mercury, and place that over the heel or over both; and keep the heel of the patient in the groin against the hub of the thigh bone.</end_of_turn
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And keep saying about the medicine and do not move until the patient feels the warmth of the medicine, which is in them thus as from fire.</end_of_turn
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore when you perceive that the other pain has ceased, the hour reads the medicine and does not move until the patient says; when the pain has ceased, the hour remains with the medicine and washes the pulse with water; and the hour considers whether the pulse is already lifted thus as from the constriction caused by the fire or incision, for the hour knows that this is good; and if it does not return concerning the medicine over the limb where it was not pressed, and until the operation is healed and the pain has subsided.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then keep the limb covered with a border until the swelling of the wound has disappeared, and then attend to that which is burning within until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to know that you must keep the wound covered with the dressing until the swelling of the wound has disappeared, and if the pulse is softened on the other days, every cause of pain which causes the patient to press on the pulse, the hour repeats the medicine over that limb which was softened, just as you did at the beginning, and immediately take it away when it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of a feather of mercury.</end_of_turn
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the humors of men are diverse according to their magnitude and their smallness, and therefore according to what is useful for each contraction.</end_of_turn
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be ashamed to ask for the straight way to that to which this art is applied.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cautery of fistula which is in the lacrimal bone of the limb.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure the fistula with what has been said in the divisions of the diseases and you do not confide your cure, the hour covers that you cauterize thus: command the patient to place their head on their thigh, and keep the head of them from any attendant between the thighs in such a way that it is not too tight or agitated on the head of the thigh bone.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And immediately place the limb immersed in water or in mucus on the limb.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And immediately apply the cautery of which this is the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is convex, thus as in the shape of a cane or of the head of a nail, to the limb where it is useful.</end_of_turn
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, penetrate through to the other limb.</end_of_turn
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, go out thus as you came.</end_of_turn
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is convex is better for the work.</end_of_turn
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And immediately close the fistula if it is open, and bring them back to health, and dry that.</end_of_turn
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, the hour opens that and removes the pus from it.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And immediately keep the cautery lit, and give them a little of the cautery of the pulse at the root of the nose, so that you do not burn your hand or make the patient restless, and the hour pauses the cautery on the gray matter of the limb and relieves that.</end>
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if the cautery enters the bone at the beginning of the procedure, it is not good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary. Leave that area untouched for three days, and then place your hand over the area around the bone and send it back into the socket until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	Even if they have passed a few days and it is not healed, then pause the aggressive corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and is as it should be according to your custom
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method of cautery for fistula is as follows: enter the fistula at the site of the fissure and clamp that. Then pause in that soft area of the wound which is the cause of the fistula. When you have done that, take note of the quantity of blood that has bled; keep your hand firmly over the wound to prevent further bleeding, and do not worry about the pain of the patient because the blood will adhere to the bottom of the fistula and will heal without any miracle.</end_of_turn>
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed with the cautery and care mentioned above, it is not good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer treatment from the nose and reduce the fistula to its natural location.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cautery of the wound let us speak.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times excessive force is used to cauterize fissures in the lips, especially in the lips of children.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures as we have said in the sections and do not take advantage of your care, then you must burn the little ulcer with the following method:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the curvature of the wound according to the softness of the tissue.</end_of_turn
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause for a moment at the beginning of the incision until the cautery reaches the base of the wound.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautery of fistula in the mouth.</end_of_turn
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is a swelling of the uvula or the palate or the roots of the teeth due to pus and it breaks and becomes infected, and there is a fistula, and you do not take advantage of the treatment, then you must burn the fistula according to the quantity that is received in the fistula. And put that fire in the mouth of the fistula, and keep your hand over it until the fire reaches its base, and after that do it slowly a little more; and take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore, if the abscess is healed and is healed, it is not good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the location and remove the corrupted bone as it is written in the chapter.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the arteries.</end_of_turn
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by humidity and the teeth are blackened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confer relief, then you must place the patient’s hand on the abdomen and burn the area of the wound with the following method. While you are doing this, keep your hand firmly over the tooth so that the fire does not burn the surrounding tissue.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And take your hand away and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.</end_of_turn
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then remove it, for the blackened tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried out.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery for toothache.</end_of_turn
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to cold, or when it is cold or hot, or does not relieve with treatment with medicine, then there are two methods of cautery: either burn around the root of the tooth or burn with fire.</end_of_turn
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Burning around the root is to take the border of cows and put it in a crucible of iron, and then take hold of the tooth and encircle it with that, and burn that around the painful tooth festinantly until it is numb.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat the above-mentioned herbs until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the border of the said tooth, and place it over the painful tooth, and place over that an ignited iron until the iron reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	More importantly, the cautery with fire is that you take care of the quality of the wood or iron, and that in the body of it any blackness or the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.</end_of_turn>
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And repeat the igniting of the cautery in the form in which it comes, and place it over the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery is cool; and do some herbs so that the pain may subside today or tomorrow or the next day.</end_of_turn
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that for the mastery of this cautery that the patient must fill his mouth with good broth and keep it there for an hour, and then draw out; and this is the way of the cautery.</end_of_turn>
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish of the extremities according to what is possible for you.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capital letter .xxii.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cautery of exostoses.</end_of_turn
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When exostoses are of fleck and of cold humors and do not readily digest with medicines and you wish to digest them slightly, then your fire will cauterize the shape of which is this following, having two extremities covered so that the smoke does not escape from the other extremity, and place the ignited flame over that abscess once with a herb, and another if you digest it with another, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.</end_of_turn
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and keep it covered for three days and place over it a cloth soaked in broth until it is digested what the fire has consumed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is burnt and wounds and cloths until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or give the cautery in such a way as to convey.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiii.	Capital letter .xxiii.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery of the palate of the voice and of the constriction of the throat.</end_of_turn
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity is over the palate of the voice, and especially when it is of cold completion, then know that the patient must be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which is beyond the root of the epiglottis in the groove below.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And know that you must not bring the cautery to the epiglottis nor burn the thyroid but only a little.</end_of_turn
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that which is beyond another cautery must be at the junction of the collarbone with the last vertebra of the neck.</end_of_turn
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of the neck is like the previous one.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is before until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capital letter .xxiiii.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery of lung disease and cough.</end_of_turn
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are of cold humors and the patient has neither fever nor chills and is ancient disease, then cauterize that which is with two cauteries over the furcula in the groove below the lower ribs and the upper part of the foot between two nipples; and the other cautery is like the previous one.</end_of_turn
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make your cautery puncture like the one that is called puncture, the form of which is described in the puncture of heel pain.</end_of_turn
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And so do punctures among cats as well; and take care of that which is before until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already the cautery has had three ramps that the cautery is like that which is with three herbs: with one herb you can make three cauteries according to this form.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	Capital letter .xxv.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery of the nipple which is the head of the assistant.</end_of_turn
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the cap of the assistant is displaced due to slippery humidity and is not fixed at the time of the convalescence, you must return the displacement to him as soon as it is customary for him to return it, and immediately, as we have testified, the covering must be reduced first of all, and then the patient must be reversed over the seat or over the side; and finally raise the knee which is on the side of the assistant’s left hand if the joint is displaced at the side of the knee.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And immediately ignite the cautery without two heads; this is the way to do it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And immediately cauterize the knee until it penetrates the other side; and the mark of the cautery will come out when there are four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so slightly according to the quantity of hair; and this is the way to do it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Each hair is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then pause over the cautery with salt, and immediately cause adhesion of the patient to tranquility, and the limb must not be painful for any time until it is comforted
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is on the upper parts and it is necessary, then immediately cauterize over the muscle under the cautery clamp or over the joints of the cautery points, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is cured
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and mucus in the stomach due to excessive humidity, and when that excess of its composition comes out and you do not confirm it, then you must reverse the patient over the seat and extend their legs and thighs, and immediately cauterize with three cauteries: on one cautery leave the toes for the amount of one finger under the cautery clamp, and on two cauteries leave the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular mark of the cautery appears; and lengthen the parts that have not been adjusted which will make a reduction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the knee.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the mark of the cautery is like this, and if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach like this; and this is a circular cautery like this:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach punctate where it is sensitive: and that is when you sense over the stomach point according to the quantity you want on the hair, and immediately cauterize that point; and immediately care for that part with the care that precedes until it is cured
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery of the painful foot
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When in the foot there is pain due to cold or humidity or for excessive wind, when the normal composition of the limb is excreted by excessive discharge, and it is cured as we have said and not confirmed, then you must reverse the patient over their shoulder, and sign over the hair three cauteries like this and with this quantity above the foot from the hipbones, holding the heel of the patient.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery is according to the thickness of the finger, and the cauteries are like the length of the limb that is taut
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press on the cautery too much
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of fluid that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the major part of the substance of the knee, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then you must sit down, having already extended their thighs, and raise the buttocks
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the way of the cautery
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you are able to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery needle, when it is at your skill and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And keep in mind that you should not progress too much in the cautery, and that the substance of the whole knee should be cauterized so that all the parts are cauterized and reach the intestines, because the knee here is subtle; and be careful
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of the swelling of the foot with a cautery
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an extrusion or swelling in the foot and you want to know if that swelling is in the bone of the foot or in the membrane of the limb, then if it is in the bone of the foot, the patient has a severe swelling and pain is acute
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the groin, the pain is greatly increased and often the doctors already abandon the care of such patients.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore cover the patient with a sheet; and almost immediately touch the area of the abscess with the cautery; and almost immediately ignite the cautery which is made of lead, as described previously on the other page.</end_of_turn>
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And burn until all the pus is consumed, until it reaches the cartilage, until it is scabbed over.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the rest of the abscesses until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this method of cautery except for those who have been studied in the art of medicine and in most of whom many bad diseases have been known; for indeed with this method one must experiment some times either with regard to this operation or to other similar ones. However, read what we must say about this, for it is better.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXVIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery of ulcers.</end_of_turn
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	I say that the ancient cauteries of the roots of arithmetic applied to ulcers are done in this manner. Take from the roots of arithmetic a thorn about the length of a finger that is found, and of the thickness of the thumb.</end_of_turn
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immerse that in oil and put that in the fire, and then burn with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula to the heel; and with two small cauteries leave guiding, one slightly declining towards the part which is below the beard, and two cauteries downwards between the fifth costal cartilage and the twelfth, declining slightly towards the parts behind; and one cautery in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauteries on the posterior parts; and one cautery in that place which is between the two buttocks, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between two buttocks.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand over the cautery, but rather in the manifestation of the wound in work.</end_of_turn
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And indeed I say that the old doctors were like those of the men who use the cautery of iron like a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until we reach that abscess and it is cured, as we have said concerning the abscess of the groin.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this perforation there is no fear, because we often see that many people die in the fistula to which they do not recover.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xix.</end_of_turn
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the abscess.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you have cured the disease of the abscess according to what we have said in the division, and you do not confer your care, then the hour of the cautery in it is according to three ways, which are all safe, either that you make three cauteries or four in line according to the length of the abscess according to the figure of the cauteries of the groin, the figure of which has preceded.</end_of_turn>
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery let the thickness be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the groin exactly.</end_of_turn
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand over the cautery; and the patient should be even above the two buttocks.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two veins, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the limb which is at the end of the abscess towards the honor, so that the pain on the left side is relieved.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you elevate the limb according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And almost immediately insert the two veins, ignite them both, in that place where they penetrate the limb from the other side.</end_of_turn
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And almost immediately withdraw the cautery; and thus there are four cauteries in total.</end_of_turn
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	Or if you wish, cauterize with three veins.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And take care of the patient more than if he had lain without moving for days, because it is different in the care of this cause than in the preceding ones.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Capital .xxxi.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery does not burn in hydropic but in fat properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you are treating hydropic, with the methods of care which we have said in the division, and do not confer your care, then you must cause that four cauteries be made on the circumference of the abdomen and one on the stomach, and one on the heel, and one between the vertebrae of the two, and two on the flanks, and one on the great toe, and one on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportional to the size of the wound
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And do not remove the cautery until it is well closed.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from care immediately after the cautery because it covers that they are being added to them two meanings, and do not eat with them until they are healed with the help of the physician
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery which is made on the belly is like a claw according to the shape of that which is precedent, and that which is made on the two olives is like that which is precedent to its shape
Capitol .xxxii.	Capital .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	From cautery of feet and the parts.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrosis and are filled with sour water, cause that the cautery be made on the two sides of the foot except for the area between the heel and the ankle, and hold your hand over the cautery and do not move it; and elevate your hand, and do not take it away until the sour water has subsided
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is like this: And make two cauteries on the two parts of the foot, and on any part make one cautery at the end of the cautery cut
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery is like the length of the part: leave the nail of the toe that is above and the nail of the toe that is below in the place of the part; and make two cauteries on each part
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open until your care is finished so that any water will drain from it
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And do the same things which we have said
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital .xxxiii
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	From cautery of the body of the abdomen
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the abdomen is cold and humid it is necessary to evacuate the verditudes, which are the digestive and retaining which are in the stomach and the intestines, and it is cured with the methods of care and is not necessary to confer them, and sometimes the patient suffers from the discharge of the verditudes and then make a great cautery on the navel according to what has preceded in the cautery of the stomach, and make one on the circle and four on the circumference of the abdomen; and one on the spleen above the ribs, or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the exhaling humors and the patient tolerate it, then make one on the flank and on the intestines, and strengthen two on the stomach and below the navel, which is perfect care for the evacuation of which there is no error
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capital .xxxiv
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	From cautery of ancient haemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of the behind ancient haemorrhoids or one of cold gross humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confer your care, then make three cauteries on the edge of the two small vertebrae and a small triangle, and remove the navel cord by two cuts
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of them is inflamed and the food is not digested, and their face is sometimes pale, then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has preceded; and one on the heel and one on the chest, and one claw-shaped, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then care for them until they are healed
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital .xxxv
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	From the cautery of the thigh close to the abscess of them
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess the thigh, then make the cautery which is like a ray on it
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And between put out the fire in that thigh abscess, and finish your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And thus we make a burn or two, for if these reach the tops, then we cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then we care for those who suffer from these burns until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if we burn with a large cautery on anything, it is better delayed in judgment.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxvi.	(The text provided ends abruptly at this point, leaving the remainder of the treatise untranslated.)</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Concerning the cauterization of fistulas that are useful in nature, they are delayed in the parts of them.</end_of_turn
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is terrified of that, whether he is healed or burned.</end_of_turn
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is a fistula in the nature that is old, corro with old blood and corrupted humors, and thus what is more deserving than to cover it is to try to uncover it, and indeed with as much gentleness as the front of the matter suggests.</end_of_turn
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And indeed we make the burn like a ray of light.</end_of_turn
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And thus we put that burn onto that fistula, and according to the quantity in which we pierce the attempt.</end_of_turn
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And you repeat this burn until those corrupted parts are consumed by fire, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.</end_of_turn>
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And take care of the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the belly, then keep away from all those parts; and do not do anything until the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And care for the place until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and so we remove from it the matters, and remain like this for a long time, then know that it is already completely healed.</end_of_turn
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, know that it is penetrating or in the preparation of doing so, or that it comes from those causes for which one will remember later in the place.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvii.	(The remaining text of the treatise is not provided.)</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	(The provided text does not contain any information regarding the cauterization of boils.)</end_of_turn
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in boils there is pain due to cold or for excessive wind, and for relieving the patient's suffering, it is customary to cauterize over the boils with a burn that is made over each boil except for the one that we must remember.</end_of_turn
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we must make several burns around a little space, because three burns in a line will be more useful for the relief of the pain.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxviii.	(The remaining text of the treatise is not provided.)</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	(The provided text does not contain any information regarding the cauterization of the bladder.)</end_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is an accident in the bladder due to inflammation and softening caused by cold and humidity, and the patient's urine does not retain, then we cauterize in the lower part over the bladder, below the perins of the pubic bone, and we cauterize with a burn in the right part and in the left part.</end>
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each burn is according to the degree of the swelling; and we cauterize with a single burn in the lower part of the thigh, or with two burns if necessary.</end>
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the burn must be made with care.</end
Capitol .xxxix.	(The remaining text of the treatise is not provided.)</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	(The provided text does not contain any information regarding the cauterization of the uterus.)</end_of_turn
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is inflammation in the uterus due to cold and humidity, and to prevent inflammation, and when the menstrual blood is corrupted, and when there is a delay in the discharge of the menses, and when there is pain in the belly, then it is necessary to cauterize the area around the navel with three burns as we said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a burn in the lower part of the thigh or with two burns, and the burn must be made with care.</end>
Capitol .xl.	(The remaining text of the treatise is not provided.)</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	(The provided text does not contain any information regarding the cauterization of ankle dislocation.)</end_of_turn
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors are infiltrated in the ankle area and cause swelling of the limb, and a sign of this is that the limb is prolonged over the other when compared to each other.</end
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is found in the area where the bones bend.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	When you cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a pointed cautery, take care not to burn the surrounding skin, as you would otherwise cause a wound, and so that the area heals in a circular fashion.</end_of_turn>
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the shape of the cautery which precedes is that of the stomach.</end_of_turn>
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three cauteries with an olive-sized tip.</end_of_turn>
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize according to the quantity of spiciness of the whole codena; and take care that it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xli.	Chapter LXI.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.</end_of_turn
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle area, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and not otherwise. When it is old, then you must remove the bad humors from the patient with laxatives or artificial pills or something similar; and then cauterize that.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of cautery in that case is in two ways: either with medicinal herbs or with fire.</end_of_turn
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Thus according to two learned methods, one of which is to cauterize that on the ankle area with three triangular cauteries as shown, and to do so with sufficient depth.</end_of_turn
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the finger, and if the cautery is olive-sized or greater.</end_of_turn
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some people put the cautery over the middle of the ankle for four cauteries.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle which precedes the shape of the dislocation of the ankle, and which is a continuous circle and consumes the spiciness of the whole codena.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery for the in ciatiqua when the pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh over the area where you sent the pain; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers a little beyond the waist.</end_of_turn
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is too deep, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the spiciness of the codena.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the patient sends that the pain extends up to the feet, then cauterize here where you sent the cautery with three or four points or more if you wish.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the patient sends that the pain is remaining even after the swelling has gone down, then cauterize here with a single deep cautery.</end_of_turn
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep this in mind in all cauteries that you should not finish the cautery until you have burned nerves or great vessels, and that for this reason it is over the patient that is about the pain and not the contraction.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen others who have cauterized on the hip and finished the cautery, and the limb became swollen until the tumor achieved the foot, and the limb was perforated and corrupted throughout.</end_of_turn
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And take a strong solution of vinegar, and thus the death.</end_of_turn
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each according to this method.</end_of_turn
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And let the learned men know that in the cautery of the ankle the cautery which is like a circle of iron whose circumference is the size of a palm; and be over the nails or orifices according to the thickness of a date seed or less.</end>
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And draw that circle a third time; and the space between them be according to the quantity of the pulse; and these circles should be united from two parts; and the length of these strokes should be one or two nails, and make in these marks of iron diligently around the circles; and this is the form of them.</end>
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And let there be fire in the fire until it is consumed and gets sparks, and let it be suspended over the ankle, and the patient lies on the side of the ankle.</end
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Therefore, cauterize with three cautery needles around the joint in a circle.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And leave it for three days; then apply a compress to the border and leave the wound open for several days; and care for the joint until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Say Albucasis: or, friends, with this kind of cautery we have rarely used for the terror of the people, and because few have found what they require concerning it.</end_of_turn>
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of these cautery needles should be made to them who suffer from it, and find out at what place they are.</end_of_turn
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cautery is better than medicines that remain; for you must make two circles with the needle having pierced the skin, in which you should put the patient's thumb and index finger of the foot; and the length of the line from the ankle to the knee should be two walnuts or as many as those.</end_of_turn
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between the thumb and the other fingers is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and that they are opened wide and relaxed, and that they contain each other in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the ankle of the patient and support the heel of the foot on the side; and compress your hand over the ankle; and take warm water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that should be neither too hot nor too cold, and keep it for the amount of an hour, and suffer the pain of the patient the biting and the swelling of the foot — for that other biting is like fire — until the biting stops.</end_of_turn>
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and wash the warm water from the ankle with cold water.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And leave it for three days and rest on that border until the black of the swelling has gone; and leave it for a few days, and run away from it when it is reduced; this is better for the patient.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Care for the joint until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or the leg, make it stand in water as is done for the ankle swelling.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the way of warm water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.</end_of_turn
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and caustic of both parts one, and grind them and rest in new water from which the part left is perforated with a small hole according to the amount that enters into it.</end_of_turn
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Rest for a while the bottom of the new water and get over that alkali and caustic alive with lukewarm water which takes those things up for a finger, and when you have compressed those with your thumb for good compression, and leave the rest that comes out of the water into the new water.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, and take another caustic alive and another alkali renewed, for that water if it remains still has strong acidity, which is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation is like fire.</end_of_turn
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of some medicines that are cauterized widely, some are as fast as the azalea and as sweet as honey and caustic with sulfur that are mixed together.</end_of_turn
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And behold the report of an ancient man concerning the operation and care with which the pain of the ankle and sciatica is cured, and magnify more than enough that, in this way, there is no need for any other care, and that he is healed for a whole week in this way, as recommended, for that strong thread that is taken in bath and ice has already taken effect from that.</end>
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is taken with certainty of green herbs, and if it is not found green, take a recent fig; and do not grind it with much gray, but rest it on the ankle where the pain is, or in the thigh or leg, and bind it.</end_of_turn
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the amount of three hours or for the amount that the patient allows of the swelling's departure.</end_of_turn
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And so put it in bath and when the limb is stiff, put it in the sun, for the pain will cease and it will be healed.</end_of_turn
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Note that these cautery needles should only be used with these medicines when the limb is evacuated.</end_of_turn
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And indeed it is said that when a vein of a goat is cut, the cautery is applied immediately; and that the cautery is to be made in this manner: take wool and dip it in oil against the cancer, and rest it between the heel and the ankle.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And so make a dry incision from the heel towards the toes; and immediately after, lay that over the bone and stretch it out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and do not cease until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cautery of cows
Capitol .xlii.	End of text.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	About the cautery of pain of two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some doctors consider pain of the two kinds to be caused by various factors, such as inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by such causes as well as by the infusion of hot and humid matter
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And do not cauterize except for this kind which is caused by the effusion of hot matter
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore cover, immediately evacuate the patient with pills that are fitted and similar to them, that they are sufficient over the two in which the pain is three lines according to their latitude, because if you do not have enough in any line or cauterize or may, according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance and the virtue of them
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery must be dry with point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four in the middle according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	End of text
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	About the cautery at the beginning of inflammation
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many doctors consider this disease in small children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that it affects their bones in the heel and causes them to limp and swell.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And so it is seen in the back that the vertebra of the two and of the three already begins to dominate over the others
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore when you see this and you wish to forbid it, then cauterize that which is circular according to this form
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that it surrounds the cautery over the whole extent of the vertebra equal
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circumference of the vertebra with two-line or three-line point cautery
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And so take care of the area until it is healthy with the water that we have said
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Beware that the cautery is not administered in inflammation that is caused by the spasm of nerves
Capitol .xliv.	End of text
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	About the cautery of gout and joint pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore when gout is caused by excessive heat, it is cured by means of treatment and not by leaving the pain, and the cautery is left
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And so you cauterize the area around the evacuation of the foot around the joint with more than one cautery
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be of olive oil of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend to the ankles or to the other joints, and when the matter moves, then cauterize over every painful area with three or four cauteries of this olive oil
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more than these cauteries are necessary, then cauterize and do not leave your hand too close to the cautery, but rather leave only the tip of the cautery exposed
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate the heel and the two, then administer the cautery that we have said in the preceding chapter
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the bones only and are severe, then puncture in the circumference of the bones just as if it were a wheel, puncture in those two lines
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remains pain in these things, then puncture in the circumference of the bones over each bone and over the base of the thumb
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pain spreads throughout the limbs or joints and extends to the feet, physicians usually call it gout.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient hastily and without medical advice, for if it is well-regulated and there is inflammation, evacuate it only with this pointed cautery if necessary, God helps.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_turn>
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for fractures.</end_turn>
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the limbs and saying the swelling outward from the belly button, and when it begins to approach, order that the patient lie still and use soft supports so that the wound does not open from the belly button.</end_turn
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient closely between your hands on the belly, and command them to keep the belly button inside until the wound is closed or the swelling or hernia disappears.</end_turn
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And return the limb immediately and bind the fracture above the fifth bone with a sign that resembles the great circle of the circumference of the limb.</end_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of the cautery:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it is neither too hot nor too cold and has cinnamon stripes.</end_turn
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</end_turn
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</end_turn
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And place the cautery over that sign with your hand over the cautery, and when you have brought the fifth bone inside the ankle; repeat this three times if you have not managed to bring it down in the first attempt onto the bone.</end_turn
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe cautiously the color of the swelling at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn the patient so that there is neither death or other great harm to the patient.</end_turn
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware that when you have finished cauterizing do not neglect the bone, do not trust your operation.</end_turn
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And the cautery of children should be subtle according to their age and measure.</end_turn
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the area of the cautery for three days with borders until the burn mark is healed.</end_turn
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those with other ailments until they are healed.</end_turn
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should rest on the belly for forty days until the area is healed and the wound and swelling have disappeared.</end_turn
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And provide that the patient abstains from food according to the length of time of their treatment, which will heal the wound of the belly, and that the swelling does not come out due to the effort of healing.</end_turn
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to take away the cautery after forty days, order that suitable medicine be administered adequately, and keep it for other forty days.</end_turn
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Remember work and refreshment of food and drink, and harsh speech, for when you use this regimen of treatment entirely the patient will be completely healed.</end_turn></end_of_turn>
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the treatment of fractures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and do not neglect, when you cauterize the fracture of that which is redone as much as it is, and that which is extruded from the navel as the third part of it; and take care of that which we have said, and do not be adjusted.</end_turn
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said that the first fracture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this way, because it is a sign with a handle.</end_turn
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is stopped with a line that lies for the width of the limb beyond the fracture, and another line below; and put your hand on with a claw cautery, for the first cautery is more painful and better.</end_turn
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVII.</end_turn
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cautery for dislocation.</end_turn
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in various limbs due to dislocation or percussion and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to treatment with medicines, order that the physician cauterize with a pointed cautery.</end_turn
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery should be applied according to the size, shape, nature, and location of the area in pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if the first burn is sufficient, it is enough; otherwise repeat the burn several times until the pain subsides, for it is known that these pains are caused by points that approach each other on the limb itself, so that when the burn is made on the part that is close to the pain, it covers that which is under it until the pain is gone.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cautery for leprosy.</end_of_turn>
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Many books speak of cautery made on the leprosy with great zeal, and manage to obtain a greater benefit if the kind of leprosy that causes corruption of flesh and melancholy is present.</end_of_turn
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore when you wish to cauterize him, consider whether the leprosy is widespread and whether that which has been cured with what we have said in the division does not remain, neither this, and fear the disease which the corruption includes throughout the whole body and all its members, for in this way cauterize him upon the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second behind it, leaving the hair in between; and on the front over the eyebrows; and on both sides over two nails; and one behind, over the nape or the shoulder.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally keep your hand over the burn for a little while until a small scab has formed on the bone, and when the scales have fallen off, the evacuation of thick vapor will be eased from it; and cauterize over the middle according to the necessity.</end_of_turn>
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears to be evident, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with these same cauteries which we have said in the head; and on the tip of the nose, and two on the two upper eyelids, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and five on the vertebrae of the chest, and one on the hip bone, and two on each ankle, and two on the toes, and two on the muscles of the thighs; and two on the joints of the fingers and toes, and on any nail of the feet; and on the wisdom teeth.</end_of_turn
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the heel so that you do not damage them.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Many are cauterized with a single cautery on the fifth toe and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the heel.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You know that the more cauteries you make, the more benefit and more comfort there will be; and you know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, even as much as he has suffered before, for the body has already become insensible.</end_of_turn
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	You must make the cauteries large or small according to the members and the joints as it is preceded by the properties of the instruments.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And pay attention to the burn with flour of herbs with honey and the other care so that it should be healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cautery for stupor.</end_of_turn
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is stiff or drowsy and is being treated with medicines, oils and plasters, and is not healing, then you cauterize the stiff limb with cauteries as it deserves according to the greatness of the limb or the smallness of it.</end_of_turn
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And make the burn penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And pay attention to that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor is cauterized in the fingers and toes, and on the vertebrae of the chest and sometimes you see the numbness of the nerves which move that limb, and it is healed.</end>
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume more than what is known about the anatomy of the limb and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cautery for ulcers that are rotting.</end_of_turn
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not yield to the touch of medicine, then you cauterize over that a little with a burn beforehand according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin until the whiteness and the color of it are restored, and the color of it is changed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And thus care for him with barley, lentils, olive oil, and balm of marigolds, and with columb or yeround, give each a part and mix them all together, and let it be applied until he is healed.
Capitol .l.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And thus care for him with barley, lentils, olive oil, and balm of marigolds, and with columb or yeround, give each a part and mix them all together, and let it be applied until he is healed.
Capitol .li.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adubilati are delayed in maturity, and this is either because of excessive fatness or because of the state of the patient, who is old in decrepitude, of little strength, or for the time, and you wish to hasten the maturity of the adubilati; then cauterize in the circuit of them small punctures; and thus will it halt the fasting of the maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you wish to make a perforation of them, then do so with the cautery of which this is the form: and stop that in the middle of the adubilati until you penetrate the tendon.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do it in that place which is more left, in order that the limb of the arm may be relieved; and thus care for him until he is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a walking corruption in the limb, which gnaws at whatever it touches as though it were fire eating dry wood
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if sometimes that corrosion is in the place where you suffer the cautery with fire, then do you cauterize nails a few at a time, as it is convenient in that place where it is corrosive
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And thus cauterize all around until you have eradicated all the corruption and there remains no cause of it
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And thus rest for three days, and stop over the cauterized places until three days have passed since the application of the oil mixed with oil until the scars have all disappeared and all the corruption has gone away.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And thus care for him with barley, lentils, olive oil, and balm of marigolds, and with columb or yeround, give each a part and mix them all together, and let it be applied until he is healed.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if even after three days the flesh appears sound in the place where there is no corruption, it is not good; but if so, then repeat the cautery over that which is soft in the corrupted places
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is sometimes treated with various herbs and acute medicine, which is half in the place of cautery
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Fire cautery is not so useful for this purpose<end_turn>
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment of this with acute medicine in the division, and so take that when you have need of it
Capitol .liii.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	When the nails of the foot are diseased and cause pain, they are called claw nails; and it is a great cause, which makes the foot swell; and the cautery is done in two ways, one with fire and the other with cold water
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Fire cautery is not so useful for this purpose, for you must kindle the cautery with a flame similar to that of a burn, which is made of iron according to the quantity of the nail which you must cauterize from the whole, and of fine stripes
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And immediately pause the fire on the claw, and immediately turn your hand towards the nail within the claw until the nail reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it rest for three days until it begins to swell
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And immediately apply a compress of salt-preserved salves over the wound, and let the compress rest on the wound for a night, so that the pain will be eradicated from its root
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound with ointment made from animal fat until it is healed
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not improve, and swelling appears on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, the doctor must administer in those nails with lukewarm water, and take a sponge or iron or vinegar, and place it over the nail; and let a little of the lukewarm water drain from the sponge, and keep your hand over it, and turn the sponge with your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the sponge onto the root of the nail, and hold the lukewarm water away from the root of the nail; and wait for the patient a little while for the pain of the lukewarm water to subside for an hour, and then remove it, because the nail will have regained its strength.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do the others until they all have recovered from all of them
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And take care of them until the roots of the nails have been eradicated with the ointments that are generated from the fat of the animals
Capitol .liiii.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Treatise on Tremor Cautery
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is tremor due to cold in the nerves or from excessive heat, or from another similar cause, the doctor must cauterize at four points or five over the vertebrae of the two, between each vertebra with a cautery; and on the legs of the patient, and over the stomach, with olive oil
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor will cease and the health of the patient will be restored
Capitol .lv.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Treatise on Cautery of Injuries to the Body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are spilled abscesses in the body, and pus-filled wounds that are caused by corrupt thick matter; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized over the whole head of the fistula with a fine needle and cautery, the extremity of which is extended towards the focus; or at the root of the fistula longus; or by cautery of the lenticular type
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases it is necessary to cauterize immediately at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and do not be discouraged, for the swelling will be dissolved by these means, and the patient will be cured of these things
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But indeed let it be known that this is useful for the evacuation with flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Treatise on the Cautery of the Flux of Sand Injury by Incision of the Artery
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	There are many wounds due to the flux of an artery that arise from the ulcer from which it originates, or from the incision of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and in this case it is difficult to stop it
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when such a thing happens, immediately put your hand over the orifice of the artery and pause over it until the bleeding stops, and do not move from that place until the bleeding has ceased.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately stop the bleeding with fine and thick cauteries, one after the other, and blow over them until they are no longer ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And immediately take from those a little or a lot according to the wound and the ulcer from which the artery is broken, over which vein tightly cauterize until the bleeding has ceased and withdraw the cautery from that place
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And when the blood has been expelled from the orifice of the artery when you withdraw the cautery, take another cautery and hold it firmly over the cauteries that are in the fire, and do not stop until the blood has clotted
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and that no other illness arises from the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you know that when an artery bursts blood, it is not possible to restrict the blood by these methods, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four things: either by cauterizing as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted the limbs are burned and the blood is restricted, or that it is tied with thread or strong ligature, or that it is supported with medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood flow; and that it is strengthened by dusting with powder of costriccio downwards
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	The physician should restrain the patient firmly both with ties and stricture of the gown or by placing the patient in a position that eliminates the cause of the inflammation and discomfort. Otherwise, you will do them more harm than good.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If the patient has not eaten or drunk anything and the physician is not present, or there is no medicine available, the hour indicates that the disease is serious. Understand that the patient is groaning in great pain, and do not leave them without treatment; do not delay in applying cold water to the wound until the pain is relieved and the swelling has subsided; and do not neglect to cauterize or treat the underlying cause of the pain.</end_of_turn>
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second section.</end_of_turn>
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision and perforation and windings and of opening up the belly and of ulcers and of their appearance.</end_of_turn>
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucazi.</end_of_turn
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases in which cautery is convenient and medicine is comburent, and the occasions and causes of these, and the instruments necessary for their forms, have been ordered in the preceding chapters.</end_of_turn
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter according to that method which is useful for healing the sick, about what has been demanded of me.</end_of_turn
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And while I begin, know that in this chapter is for fear what is in the first chapter of cautery.</end_of_turn
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason we must exercise great caution, for in this operation there is great danger of causing evacuation of the bowels, which is both harmful to the patient and dangerous for life if the vein is torn or if the incision is made over the abscess or if there is opening of the belly or evacuation of the plague or extraction of a splinter or incision of a stone.</end_of_turn
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these things are accompanied by fear and tremor and in most of them death.</end_of_turn
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I admonish you that you should not attempt anything in this regard, for there are many people who handle such matters with greater skill and wisdom than you.</end_of_turn
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is better for you to leave the treatment of your illness to those who are skilled in this and who are accustomed to dealing with such matters, for they are well aware of the dangers of these things and of the pain and suffering they can cause, and they know how to treat them effectively.</end_of_turn
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And this is what gives rise to your fear and saying, your expectation of healing, and the harmful nature of your disease.</end_of_turn
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to any one who proposes this treatment to you; and your caution should be greater than your desire and your eagerness; and do not presume any cause except for one which you are certain is effective and which promises to bring about a lasting healing.</end_of_turn
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the care of all these diseases the prognosis and indication which are useful for the preservation of health and for the restoration of glory, for in this lies your greatest aid to fame and memory, to love and glory.</end_of_turn
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God be with you and give you understanding and guide you, for he is in your hand.</end_of_turn>
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished from the chapters concerning cautery, concerning the care of the head and the limbs, so that it may be of service to you in the matters which you demand and which you require.</end>
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.</end_of_turn
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of water which is contained in the heads of children.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	I say that this disease often occurs in children and when the nurse delivers the child at birth, its life is in danger.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And many times the cause of this is unknown.</end_of_turn
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it has caused death, and this is why I have undertaken to write about it.</end_of_turn
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, the head of which was always swelling up, so that it could no longer bear its own weight, and that even when the physician was unable to support it, it died from the swelling.</end_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is either added between the cartilage and the bone, or is added outside the bones over the cartilage.</end_of_turn
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the moisture is between the navel and the hip bone and the pus is little, then you must make a cut in the middle of the foot with a split two fingers wide, so that the moisture may run out.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the pus is greater, then two incisions are made according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture remains in the bones, a sign that the abscess of the head is open and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your thumb against the flanks, and it is not what you would expect from it.</start_of_turn>
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So you must make three incisions in the middle of the foot according to this manner:</start_of_turn
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And so extract all the moisture; then strengthen the incisions with strips and feathers; then pour oil over it and vinegar until the fifth day, and then remove the ligament and care for the wound with attempts and ointment, and strengthen the foot equally; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.</start_of_turn>
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for some veins are more prominent in the occipital region, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the escape of the water, and cut as little as possible.</start_of_turn
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And note that you must not cut the artery, and keep the patient calm and quiet, and feed the patient for the flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.</start_of_turn
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.</start_of_turn>
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incisions of the arteries which are close to the ankles, called hilasseyssae.</start_of_turn
Capitol segon.	Chapter III.</start_of_turn
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When swelling appears on the toes or thighs, and it is old, and you do not trust in the cure of medicines, then the best cure for this is the incision of those two arteries.</start_of_turn
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so it is necessary when you wish to make the incision that the patient should raise the limb high up, and press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and strengthen the patient's hand at some mark; and consider where the vein is located; and the places where some of the veins which are close to the ankles are depressed, and do not go further unless in the case of some people.</start_of_turn
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And so about the arteries that are around the ankle, try to pierce them with a tentative incision, and make an incision at the apex of each part that is acutely painful at the incision to reach the bone, and be careful of the water.</start_of_turn
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, remove the pus from outside the artery and join the incisions at the parts beneath.</start_of_turn
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut the blood is ejected with a pulsatile flow, which leaps from side to side frequently.</start_of_turn
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the artery does not appear on the palpation, then you must measure the ankle to determine the amount of space of three fingers, and try again, and cut into the bone.</start_of_turn
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you must get from the blood is the amount of one ounce.</start_of_turn and do not take more or less than that, but do so according to the amount that appears from the virulence of the disease and the emptying of the artery.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of pain, then you must cut again so that no abscess arises from the cautery.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with feathers and strips of linen, and care for that which is inflamed until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.</start_of_turn
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.</start_of_turn
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some ancient or acute accidents happen, for agricultural humidity and for the quality of the lacerations of the temples, or because of an ancient violent infection that seems like those, and when medicine cannot cure them, then we must resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or the cauterization of those in the same way as we have shown.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the limb for the ones for which they are in the temples; and understand that the artery that appears in the temple is that which you have shown with your finger, and that it is hidden except in a few people because of its ferocity.</start_of_turn
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, the hour of the patient's suffering is strong with some medicine; and quickly apply a rough or evaporating medicine to the area until the swelling appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And thus you take hold of the patient's flank, of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And quickly grasp the heel at that place where it is easier until you reach the swelling; and grasp in it behind and extract that from the surrounding parts until you extract that from the heel and uncover that which you left behind from the whole part.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Moreover, if the artery is narrow, the hour encompasses that part with the limb, and quickly cut away a part according to the quantity for which the limbs are elongated and contracted, and do not let blood flow, for if they are not cut away, it will not cure the ailment.</start_of_turn
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And quickly evacuate blood from the wound one cubic inch.</start_of_turn Until three.</start_of_turn>
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the swelling is great, the hour covers that you bind that in two places with strong gut or strong strings, and do not leave it putrefy until the consolidation of the plague has occurred and let blood flow.</start_of_turn
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And quickly evacuate the superfluous which is between two ligaments; and do that in that hour or do it at another time.</start_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a pointed cautery within the bone, and leave it until the limbs are relaxed, and do this work instead of that.</start_of_turn
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is suffering from scaly congestion; for the cautery is of those causes that help to finish the humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.</start_of_turn
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover quickly the extraction of the arteries that you see in the ankle, and keep them covered with fine powder diligently done, and do not let it dry out until it is healed with dry medicines that cause the flesh to swell and soften until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another vein leaks blood from the artery, the hour you must cover that blood, or that you cauterize it, or that you fill the ankle with something, and hold your hand over that until the blood flow is stopped.</start_of_turn
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of these causes are present for you, the hour suspends the thigh mentioned above until the blood is congealed, and soak the area with cold water of violent coldness until the pain subsides, and be strong as you please.</start_of_turn
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more curious in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with two clips having two teeth, since you have marked the two places with a finger, and take away some, not burning, until you reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that it is elongated what is between the limbs, which are not consolidated at all by this cautery.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:</start_of_turn
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two teeth is enough.</start_of_turn
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	More importantly, if they are of smaller sharpness than two teeth, it is better, for if they are sharp as two teeth close to each other, they do not bite the flesh with speed.</start_of_turn
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is some thickness, keep the fire hot in those and the flesh is split with fear.</start_of_turn
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in all work and more pleasant.</start_of_turn>
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two teeth is the quantity of the thickness of the finger.</start_of_turn
Capitol quart.	End of text.</start_of_turn
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care of the limbs affected by sharp and acidic humors of the bones.</start_of_turn
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acids are humors, and it is the limb of those veins which are over the head of the ankle, and do not suffer from any cause of medical care, and sometimes the face of the patient already swells up and sits down in front of walking like a walk of ants, and the bones of that limb are extended, huming loudly that they have already been recognized, and the nails are scaled by the sharpness of the tears, the old practices mixed in the care of these are now useless, and do not do that care with space.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to move his heel away from the places where they are in the front, and quickly make three incisions equally distant according to the length of the front.</start_of_turn
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fracture lies two fingers: one fracture be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the face, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelashes which are on the lacrimal, and the third of the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Keep your hand away from the start of the arteries which are in two lines, and prolong your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of any incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.</end_of_turn>
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if there is a piece of sponge dressed or dry cloth moist with them which you will use to dry the wound.</end_of_turn>
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert between the palm of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision for them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the upper part of the temples to the second incision.</end_of_turn>
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excoriate all that whole chain which is between two incisions on the lip which is over the bone, and then make that which is from the incision to the second incision migrate into the second incision.</end_of_turn
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then take away this sponge and enter with another vein another instrument which is called cautery, sharp at one end and blunt at the other.</end_of_turn
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the edge of that sharp thing which is against the soft part of the bone, and the edge of it which is against the bone does not penetrate the bone, and fill that up until it reaches the migrating fracture, and close with that all the blood vessels which go from the head to the feet.</end_of_turn
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May be continued the incision until after the bone, and then make that which is in the migrating fracture enter into the other fracture.</end_of_turn
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the wound has healed as much as possible, press the places of the feet of the wound with cotton wool.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then keep the wound from cracking by placing an old coat over the wound, and cover those powders with vinegar and oil and vinegar again, and whatever does not stick to the cautery.</end_of_turn
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and give great abundance of lukewarm water or broth, and care for that which is with ointment of beeswax with olive oil and other things until the wounds are healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .v.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the care of tears for catarrh and from the feet descend from the parts which are distant from the head.</end_of_turn
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When in some cases there are acute catarrhs and they continue, and sometimes the feet of the patient extend slightly, and already in regard to them it is necessary to consider their weakness, and the ulcerated eyelids and their weight press upon them, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain leading to subsequent vomiting, for these accidents the matters and the catarrh do not suffice but for the veins of the distant parts.</end_of_turn
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that the patient should chew less, and make an incision in the middle of the face, a little for the width (and begin with the left temporal vein until the right temporal vein; and let the incision be over the bone; and stretch your hand from the tears of the temples which are made by the chewing), until the bone is exposed.</end_of_turn
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the wound with sponge or with dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fracture with old coat or with cotton cloth.</end_of_turn
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then keep it away from sticking to the powders by pouring vinegar and oil over them.</end_of_turn
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed it and you see that the swelling has already diminished, the hours cover that the bones should be cold until they begin to feel soft, and then care for that which is with gentle drying which makes the flesh soft, just as if you took from wheat two parts and from barley four parts and mixed them together, or that you make plaster and administer it to these wounds as to the soft flesh which has not yet healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vi.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the care of that which catarrhs in the ears.</end_of_turn
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause which causes catarrh in the ears is of four kinds, either a mineral pebble or something similar to a pebble, such as iron and ivy, or of plant origin such as rue or peas, or a mobile cause such as vinegar and wine and their like.</end_of_turn
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when the stone is in the heel or for any other reason similar to those that do not adjust or grow in the heel, and it is supported by the heel alone, and sometimes the stone, the hour distills in any of those causes of olive oil or urine, and then administer the extraction of the stone, and make it vomit, and apply compresses to the area following the vomiting.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And immediately stop the flow of the heel some pieces of fat or grease, and stretch the heel to the parts below, because swelling caused by these causes is harmful to this area
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not harmful, the hour administers the extraction of the stone with the instrument called epicicarium subtle, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is harmful with the epicicarium, do not do it; otherwise, the hour administers the extraction of the stone with any other subtle means.</start_of_turn>
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if it is not harmful at all, the hour makes a needle of gut and inserts the extremity of the needle into the cavity of the heel and closes around the needle with wax and olive oil so that nothing is left except the needle itself.</start_of_turn
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with the gut thread with great attraction, because troops swelling like water that we have recounted.</start_of_turn>
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Maybe if it is not harmful in this way, the hour takes hold of the inflamed or festering with which these are surrounded, and takes hold of the toes in the heel, and covers that with a bandage adequately stretched.</start_of_turn
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the cavity of the heel with ease, and immediately extract the heel from the moisture.</start_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if it is not harmful from all the causes that we have recounted, the hour orders you to cut off that which is causing the pain, whether it be a splinter or spasm.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting off that which is causing the pain is that you first heal the inflammation of the saphenous vein and extract the stone according to the virtue of the stone, and then make that cease between your thighs and convert the heel to the parts below, and make a small fracture in the heel over the grey matter of the stone beforehand.</start_of_turn
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the fracture should be of a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is grasped, obstruct that if possible with appropriate instruments; and immediately close the fracture at that hour, and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the heel is one of the fats that grow and infiltrate, the hour administers the cure and the extraction of the stone; but if you do not obey his order even then, the hour will take hold of you with force according to this method:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the excision of that fat which is causing the pain in the heel.</start_of_turn
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not be astonished when you think that that is already moistened by the vapor of the heel, and stop it in pieces, and immediately extract it with nails or with a subtle instrument, or as we have said, since the extraction is alleviated.</start_of_turn
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the heel cover that the pain uses for vomiting at the beginning, and fill the sole of the heel with some old rags, and place over that heel the one in which the water is, and if because of that it is harmful, do not do it; otherwise, the hour takes hold of your thumbs and index fingers according to the length of the finger, and makes you bite those in the fire a little, and the patient puts one of those into the cavity of his heel and jumps over one leg of that part and beats with the other foot on the foot that is causing the heel to bend.</start_of_turn
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop until all the water is harmful.</start_of_turn>
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is finally harmful, take paper or gut instead.</start_of_turn And put one extremity into the heel and extend the other extremity into the fire until the most of it is burned.</start_of_turn
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And immediately put the other gut and make the water so many times until all the water is harmful, and then extract that with a needle as we have said.</start_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of stones that enter that heel, if it is small, push and hold it like this, care for it as we have said in the division; but if it is large that causes pain at the same time, the hour administers the extraction of the stone with instruments and nails, and the cause of the stone is less severe than all the other causes that cause pain in the heel.</start_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	More in the extraction of worms engendered in the heel, when you cure that one which we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations, do not neglect your care, for it is necessary that you require the heel to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if there appears here any cause of the worms, then extract that one which is thick or viscous, even if no cause appears, then take a canula and draw it out wide; this is the form of them
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the limb slightly into the heel according to the quantity which the patient suffers; and immediately suck upon that to extract well, and make water vapor, until all the worms are driven out
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	More if you do not obey me at this point, for I close the circle of the canula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which we have already mentioned in the care of worms, and you will find them in the treatise of distillations
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with the oils of the medicines in the heel with this instrument of which this is the form
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or gold, wide and straight, in which there is a small hole, and hold it out.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is like the handling of the continent here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the limb adequately tight, and immediately pour oil into the hollow of the limb, or juice of any herb, or water of whatever you wish of these medicines through the canula – that is in the heel – and immediately extract the ray with the thumb and press with your hand that which compression is temperate until the oil is expelled from the hollow of the limb and the patient has the oil remaining inside the limb.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infused in the heel is already scorched with fire a little
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep that the cause for which you distill in the heel is not too hot, for the medicines of the heel do not suffer from that.</start_turn>
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</start_turn>
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the care of the opiling of the heel.</start_turn
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some veins of young children and young women are not pierced by the greater veins, and that which has already happened in some men, opiling in the meat of the heel for plague or for no other reason; and this opiling is useful in the preparation of the vein of the heel which does not always succeed, and some are in the outer parts
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the preparation of it, which does not always succeed, is in the greatest precautions of difficult healing.</start_turn
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you succeed, cover that you stop the heel of the patient to the sun and require it in that.</start_turn
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if sometimes there appears an opulation, open that which is like a small sponge of the which this is the form.</start_turn
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb is small in the width, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the sponge is of two lions so that it does not make the heel sore.</start_turn
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And thus if the opiling is for a wound born in the heel or in the meat of the limb, then extract that which is thick and viscous and cut that with great ease until all the wound is gone.</start_turn
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opiling is in the preparation of the heel, then take a sponge of lion and burn that which is fire a little, and immediately put that on the meat of the heel.</start_turn
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you smell an opulation in water in which the patient finds ease, for the greatness of the rise, endeavor to compress it with ease; and keep that you do not damage the nerves of the heel.</start_turn
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately stop the bleeding in the heel according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have enveloped in Egyptian unguent; and make water for the limb for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or that you take something and press that into the water and sprinkle over it some pounded herbs and use of it; and if sometimes the heel has already clotted, then cover that which you took out and change that for another which you will wrap in fat that is useful with oil of roses, until the clot is given up; and immediately care for that until it is healed.</start_turn>
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	More if an accident of discharge occurs, then submerge sponge or bandage in cold water and stop over the heel, and use another treatment which tightens the flow of discharge, which is said in the treatise of distillations.</start_turn
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Capital VIII. From the care of the swelling which arises from the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil which arise from the swelling of the eyelids due to any moisture, some are wet, others are dry
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you must have those [points] well held, or well bound, and cut those which are in the roots, and then place your hand over the area to prevent them from breaking.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Maybe if there is pain from the flow of the blood, then you cauterize those which are pointed like lancets.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the vesicles and tough veins are still inflamed; when they are cauterized while hot, those veins are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Capital IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care of the great swelling that arises from the eyelids of the eyes
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The wet spots arise from the eyelids of the eyes for any cause which is similar to a great swelling in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called great swelling
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of large moisture in the inner eyelid and outside
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation in them is to consider if the swelling is due to the excessive moisture in the eyelids, which is moist throughout; and the cause of it is lightness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore make an incision along the width, and drain that throughout easily so that it escapes, and suspend that which is on the outside and cut that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not pierce the eyelid slightly if you do not penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then it will not be noticed in any way
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for that until it is healed
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, it will not be harmful to leave it as it is because the wound will restore itself and will scar
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining at the margins of the eyelid, you must stretch the surface of the eyelid; then remove the swelling by cauterizing, another that you do not dig into the incision, and cut that throughout, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, it will not be noticed in any way
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And finally, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the area around the wound until it is healed
Capitol .x.	Capital X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the care of the surrounding area of the eyelid outside the eye
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Surrounding the area is gray which is generated in the membranes of the eyelid outside, and especially in children, it aggravates the eyes of those who suffer from it and makes them dull; and it does not allow the sun's rays to penetrate because the tears are moistened by them
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore sometimes those who are sweating on their faces all the time, and over their faces when they sleep; and over the eyelids of their eyes they have wet eyebrows, which already cover the swelling, and the imminent appearance of wrinkles is in the eye; and when you press on the area around the eyes, you see wrinkles within those
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Every method of operation in that case is to put the thumb of the hand over the root of the hair and with the other hand make a circle according to the quantity that contains all the hair of the entire area, and when you have made the circle, press again on that area and cut throughout so that there is an accumulation of wrinkles in the middle of the circle, and finally make an incision along the width of the fold so that the fold is not greater than the incision that is made in flabby skin.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Therefore in the preparation cover that the entire hair is cut off so that only the wrinkles remain, because in this way wrinkles are processed by incision following the shape of white spots
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract that which you have wrapped with the drapes that you have placed between the thumb and the little finger and twist between the thumb and the little finger until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And take care that you do not make the incision too deep so that the moisture does not reach the eye and remove that part.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the hair in the beginning of the incision, then adjust the incision slightly so that you can process the hair; and when you have processed the hair, remove that as we have said; and finally bathe the area with vinegar and wine and apply some powder over the area and dry those that are dusty
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus it is that when salt is triturated and the excess is removed from the cavity of the wound, that which remains of that humidity will be left in the hollow of the fissure.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus it is that when salt is triturated and the excess is removed from the cavity of the wound, that which remains of that humidity will be left in the hollow of the fissure. And thus it is that the said humidity is cured.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And thus it is that when salt is triturated and the excess is removed from the cavity of the wound, that which remains of that humidity will be left in the hollow of the fissure. And thus it is that the said humidity is cured. More often, however, if the wound has been cauterized on the sole, the doctor should allow the eschar to fall off by itself, for it is cured when the underlying tissue has healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xi.	Capitol XI.</end_of_turn>
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods of handling fevers.</end_of_turn
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the humors of the head grow lazy and limp, and their natural movements are hindered, then these humors become the cause of many illnesses, such as excessive weeping and the softening of the eyes and the membrane of the head. In such a case, there are four methods of treatment: either by cautery or by acute medicine as is mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and suture; or by trephination.</end_of_turn
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore you must hold the patient’s head down in the belly; then convert the eye of the limb to your left hand, and if it has been converted, well and good; otherwise, insert the needle in that place where you have faith of the part beyond the eyelashes, and make the needle penetrate the flesh beneath, and that which is — from the margin of the eyelid where the eyelashes depart — from the eyelashes, and pull the thread from the parts beneath the eyelid, and convert that to the ray.</end_of_turn
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Therefore you must bring down the part of the eye beyond the eyelashes so that the eyelashes rest against the greater palpebral aperture; and then extract the thread and leave the eyelid covered with small pieces of lint or gauze, and press over the eye with your thumb, as with the figure of a leaf of myrtle.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Therefore, however, you must take into account the degree of elevation of the eye, for that which is different in men, for some require that the large part of the eye should be incisized according to the degree of softening.</end_of_turn
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Therefore you must take hold of the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the greater palpebral aperture towards the smaller.</end_of_turn
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the wound is upon the natural parts just as in the case of the king’s greatness.</end_of_turn
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And thus it is that you must put on the sponge at one of the two angles of the wound, and then strip off that whole area, and with the fingers adjust the two lips upwards or downwards, and dry the wound, and stick whatever excess of thread over two eyebrows with various means, if you wish to do so, but do not cure if you do not wish.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And thus it is that you must read the sutures of the wounds within three or four days, and then cure them.</end_of_turn
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, lay open the wound beyond the sutures, and cure that which exudes and contracts, because the eye is lifted from behind the sealing of the wound and the gathering of the parts; more suture is better. And thus I say to those who tax me.</end_of_turn
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Therefore, however, in these matters it is necessary to consult about the patient, and it is a good operation, and do not be afraid.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And thus it is that there is another method in treating, which is that you draw a figure upon the eye like a leaf of myrtle, and then raise the eye by three nails which are separated and converged in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if this is not possible, take the nails, and that which is not blunt, and with a needle which has thread, insert that into the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread over the greater palpebral aperture, and the thread according to over the smaller, and adjust between the folds of the nails with equality, and then raise your hand with elevation equal to that which has been recommended.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus it is that you must adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and cure that which remains when it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And thus it is that if after the incision there remains any swelling around the wound or the wound itself, that you should keep that swelling down and support it, and apply cold packs.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And thus it is that many herbs that are seen on the eye that cause it to swell must be avoided, so that you use in this one of the things which we have mentioned regarding incision; more suture is artificial.</end_of_turn
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cauterize the nail is according to this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	Then you should shape the nail and split the figure according to what I have recounted; and for this purpose do two nails or two fine needles whose length is according to the length of the nail and whose width is less than the width of the cuticle.</end_of_turn>
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already pierced the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.</end_of_turn>
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some slight substance over that which flows from the nail of the heel, and tighten the nails of each part with great stricture, and leave it for a few days, because the cord for the stricture will die and become soft and will disappear by itself.</end_of_turn
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Even if it is late, when the nail has healed, then care for the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the nail is elevated and the pain does not return.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to do two nails according to this manner.</end_of_turn>
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	pay attention to the quantity of the length and the width, neither more nor less.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xii.	End of document.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	From the elevation of the pain in the heel when the nail is hard.</end_of_turn
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the nails are unnatural, hard and rough and pierce the heels, the custom in their treatment is that you take a fine needle and pass it through the centre of the callous and lemon, and that you hold the extremities of the nails and do not move them in any way.</end_of_turn
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the nails is like the quantity of a palm.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then take another fine needle and leave it in place for a while, and do not move the extremities of that.</end_of_turn
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient face down on the couch if possible, and be close to the sun so that your work is declared, because it is a subtle and small operation.</end_of_turn>
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the nail adjusted which has needed to be excised, and make that penetrate into the nail quickly until you extract that which is not the natural nail.</end_of_turn
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then withdraw the nail inside and immerse it in oil, and leave them in for one or two or three days and no more.</end_of_turn
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then withdraw your hand from that until the nail is removed with oil from the nail of the natural nail.</end_of_turn
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the nail is not softened by the oil and is not withdrawn, apply oil to the parts around the nail that you have cauterized until the nail is softened from the root.</end_of_turn
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And so it is with the vision of the heel, because when you have cauterized the nail and the thread, groan somewhat and clench the heel, and leave it closed for two days or three, until the nail adheres to the skin and appears on the good nail.</end_of_turn
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the nail is shorter than the natural nails, then you adjust a longer nail to that, and elevate it like that, or that you leave it until it is elongated to almost the space, and when that is done you elevate that.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the care of the wound that appears in the heel from under the nail.</end_of_turn
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there appears in the heel a wound from under the nail, and the nail contracts when it is contracted in its entirety or to the left or right side, due to bad consolidation of the wound or section or cautery, and if it is caused by leprosy, this is either natural or accidental, and is useful for consolidating the wound or section or cautery, or for preventing it from becoming deformed.</end_of_turn
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner in which to perform the operation in this case is that you make that consolidation and separate the edges of the wound, and leave it in oil until there is a piece of silk between them, and tie them up until they are healed.</end_of_turn
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use any remedy for the cause of the wound, except for constriction; for if you do this you will make things worse rather than better.</end_of_turn
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in such cases that which softens them as fenugreek, and embroider with water in which the nails are soaked to a height of half an inch and seeds of flax, or ointment of diaper, which is liquefied with some oil, and immerse in this the piece of silk, and care for it.</end_of_turn
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your care is that you perform everything without solidifying it according to the manner in which you began.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	The operation which we have mentioned is nothing other than the rectification of swelling that does not restore the limb to its former shape as before.</end_turn>
Capitol .xiiii.	End of text.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	About the care of swelling that is useful in the eyelids.</end_turn
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This swelling which is useful in the eyelids is properly called a true swelling; and it is either natural or accidental.</end_turn
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental swelling is caused by a wound or a cut or a burn or other similar things.</end_turn
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of performing the operation is that you take a needle and make a double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and pass the thread from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, through which the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.</end_turn
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh around the needle and hold that with the needle, and make an incision at a wide space.</end_turn
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Therefore, if you restore the shape of the eyelid according to what you covered, it is not good; and if not, take the needle and hold that in the indented figure, and on that convert the eyelid, and close the two incisions on the side of the lower eyelid.</end_turn
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the two extremities of the two incisions make two angles, the one that has been made inside will be of two angles, and the one that is left will be of two angles, so that when they meet, the figure will be restored.</end_turn
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.</end_turn>
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then keep the flesh that remains in the quantity that is the width of its belly, so that the eyelid is closed.</end_turn
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and close them with the thread of silk; and then take care of them as for the medicines that we have mentioned and the patches that must be put on to make it healthy.</end_turn
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the swelling has to be done for a wound or a suture or a burn, then cover that wound with a flat incision over the edge of the eyelid as it is said before.</end_turn
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the gauze between two lips as we have said.</end_turn
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary of the word concerning the care of swelling when it is dry or oily, that runs in the operation, according as it is prepared in the manner of swelling, and that is in the manner of various patches.</end_turn
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled physicians always prepare everything in every way possible so that it is possible for them to restore the figure to its natural shape, or in any case, that the patient is cured according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments at their disposal.</end_turn
Capitol .xv.	End of Text.</end_turn
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	About the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.</end_turn
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion happens to several people at once, it is necessary to solidify the eyelid more than under the influence of the humors, and to prevent the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore you must remove the point of the needle from the eyelid, and lift it up with that, or stretch that with the thumb.</end_turn
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then make the adhesion solid with a soft sponge, which should not be of the same sharpness as the incisions, having made an obtuse point so that the patient is not distressed by the operation, and keep that sponge moist so that it does not dry out the eye.</end_turn
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And the incision should be made as little as possible so that it does not irritate that adhesion until the eyelid is restored to its natural shape and the adhesion is completely healed.</end_turn
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or distill it from vinegar dissolved in water.</end_turn
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with gauze of lint, and put over the eye a pad of lint soaked in oil, and on the third day use adhesive substances until it is healed.</end_turn
Capitol .xvi.	End of Text.</end_turn
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the incision of the nail and the prominence of the cartilage of the lacrimals.</end_turn
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	The wise say that the nail is according to two manners, that is, either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard, soft sponge; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture frozen, which when you touch it, or force it to take hold with the nail, is separated and the nail is not fixed in it.</end_turn
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	Both tears start from the large tear gland and gradually cover the eye, preventing light and movement of the pupil.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of handling the patient at the incision is such that the patient should keep their head down in the belly, and at the same time grasp their heels, elevate the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail on one side with little duplication and extend it to the other side.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take a needle and enter it into the heel of a horse or a calf or a sheep, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and keep that in the middle of the nail, and pierce through that with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend that to the other side, and scratch the skin around the nail as much as the pupil allows.</end_of_turn>
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you have finished that at the back of the foot.</end_of_turn>
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And keep your incision in the root of the lacrimal with a spatula or small forceps, and release the natural secretion of the lacrimal so that by incision of that there is no continuous discharge of tears.</end_of_turn
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And as for the nail on the thumb, extend it with oil once spread or with thread, as we have said, and at the same time do the same with the nails of the little finger.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And keep that the spatula does not touch the corneal tunic and that you avoid its rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.</end_of_turn
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then take the incision away from the eye and put a little salt or ointment on the wound, and keep that until the next day; and take care of that which covers within that so that it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in, nor is it pierced in that place, the way of treating this kind of nail is with medicines, and it is healed in the same way as before and as recommended in the division.</end_of_turn
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to make an incision in that case, then you or the patient should take away the smell of the patient and take a spatula of blunt forceps of acute freule according to this manner:
am subtilitat.	With calmness.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes that is rare and is confused and comes into that place, the hours distill from your hour in the eye of the patient by making ointment or ointment or salt, and put the eye into the other day.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeat that operation until everything that is of it is removed, except that the contrary aftercare is in the eye, which you must read, and care for the aftercare of the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation concerning that reason until it is healed.</end_of_turn
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The swelling of the lacrimal gland, if you notice it in the eye during the night, is suspended with oil; and make the incision of that part, and do not finish the incision so that no tears flow from it.</end_of_turn
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And let the tears distill in the eye ointment or by making ointment until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of the eyelids and what is born from a well-adjusted gland in the eye.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the heels of the almonds there is a birth of a rough gland, and it is too large until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or expands over the eyelids and tightens the eyelids against the margins and is bound together like a balustra.</end_of_turn
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation for that is that the patient keeps their head down in the belly; and at the same time grasp their heels and collect all that gland with nails convenient at once, and take hold of that with a forceps or a clip; and make the incision of the gland at the beginning until everything is finished with the surgeon, and take care not to touch that which you must leave from your operation.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision concerning which you must make that incision or with blunt forceps of which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps as it is collected together according to how it will come in this chapter.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when your incision is completed and all that gland is removed, then fill the eye with salt, or let it drip in powder form like common medicines, and put a bandage over the eye with a piece of cloth until the aftercare is complete.</end_of_turn
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there remains any cause of stiffness and it is urgent to cauterize, and you fear infection, then read the patient's pulse and care for that infection in the place where it subsided. Then repeat the cautery over that until it is healed, and simultaneously perform the usual care which is customary for this kind of ailment.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must know that all treatment for such an infection is either natural or accidental, or with iron. Do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the limb is suffering from the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	(The text continues with an index of herbal remedies.)
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	From the collection of saffron in the wound
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Saffron so makes the veins rigid which are tested on the wound and forbids the dressing from moving, and must leave the wound for a long time
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to consider if there is much saffron in the wound and if there is no other illness besides saffron, then collect that saffron
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head on the belly if they are able, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two as you deem appropriate; and let that ounce be doubled in this way:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so two ounces gradually in a body according to this manner
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine forceps, with subtlety, and remove the infection an hour at a time until all the veins are relaxed from the wound and relaxed
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Remember that you must not touch the wound at the edges of the swelling; and if you are performing the operation in the morning before sunrise, give the wound some sunlight, and if you are firm in your operation do not introduce anything except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed the treatment, then you must instill cold or lukewarm water in the wound so that the acidity which remains from the saffron is corroded.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However if that is not possible for you, then you must cover everything with water that has subsided the pain, and read it for a few days until the pain has subsided and the cautery has healed
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat over it as the maid manages until it is healed
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the way of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	(The text continues with instructions for using forceps.)
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	About the reduction of the swelling from the nose to the chin
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you have cured the swelling with cautery or acute medicine, and when it has not healed according to the narration, do not be afraid but make an incision over the maturity of the swelling and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is revealed
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is revealed and sometimes in its corruption or blackness, then you must grasp it with a tool of this kind:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough cap, and make it with an awl, and make the head round like this so that it is pierced with a puncture of lime or alum (as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate that between the thighs mentioned, and press your small hand gradually until you see that that corruption is gone
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if there is any blood, then restore the limb with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the limb is consolidated and there is good flesh in it and the body is excised from the infection and remains for forty days, and is not renewed or apostematized and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then you must only reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: if you discover the bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is revealed, then you take three stripes according to this manner:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The limb is stripped with a triangular iron, and the handle of the iron is extended towards the limb as sometimes done before
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, and that from the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little from the wound, and then rotate your hand over the stripe until you have pierced all the bone, and that the patient feels no pain so that he knows that the bone is properly treated.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore restore the limb with astringent and drying medicines like those which we have mentioned earlier.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the limb and the area are firmly bound, the material which flowed out previously returns to its place, so that this is more likely to be the cause of the disease.
Capitol .xx.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	When the swelling has subsided.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling completely disappears and does not recur in the night or diminish, then you must know that the disease has passed away, and that you should continue treatment; and that you should stop the winds blowing in the neck and chest for sacrifice, and give them food and soothing substances such as aloe, enses and ochre, and strengthen the plaster over the swelling with powder.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powder is that you take lion's mane cloths four-ply; and use these cloths.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And put them on one over the other according to the quantity of which the swelling requires.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen over those with a hard and strong bandage; and give them rest from the winds blowing for sacrifice; and prevent the winds from blowing and let the swelling rest straight day and night.</end_of_turn
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Even if the ligament is softened, it must be kept straight.</end_of_turn>
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And prevent the ligament both day and night as we have said.</end_of_turn
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the swelling has already subsided, good, and if not, then continue the plaster with the powder and the bandage and the winds until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the swelling of the tunica uvea.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it is prominent and the eyelashes are pushed out like a barley grain, and the shape is like a house because of this, and if you want to perform an incision, then the operation is as follows: enter the needle at the root of the eyelashes of the lower part and the upper part of the lacrimal; and penetrate with the needle and withdraw the first needle according to its direction; and then insert the needle where the fold of the double fold is, and bring the part of the eye with the fold of the double fold into the circle of the needle, and strengthen that place.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then withdraw the needle and place over the swelling infused with album of honey and remove the thread from the wound.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of the swelling so that it is comforted when the wound is healed.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And several herbs gathered from all parts around the swelling in a circle of silk within the swelling adjust the great swelling, and when it is perforated with the fine needle that comes from the preon of the swelling, the watery vapor escapes, and the swelling goes down immediately.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn
De curacio de alconati.	Of the care of alconates.</end_of_turn
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconate is nothing other than a wound that is adjusted in the swelling resembling water descending and is not that.</end_of_turn
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	However, the manner of working on it is that you make the disease subside over the swelling that appears and straighten it, and take the head firmly with your two hands from the two sides and when you see the wound healing in the parts behind, and it does not descend, and keep it dry, the disease will see its causes just as it used to.</end_of_turn
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downwards, you know that it is water.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	However, if it is not prepared with water as we have said, the disease will make the swelling go between your hands and take a pointed cautery and burn over that area above the bone until a little piece of the conjunctiva is separated from the cornea at the edge (within the place where the wound was), until the wound is expelled.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is expelled, you distill in the swelling cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And so treat the other causes until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the qualities of the water in the division and what is convenient for perforation should be declared according to the situation.</start_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And so treat the other causes until the patient is healed.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And so treat the other causes until the patient is healed. And so keep the limb of the thumb away from the crown because of the thickness of the ray in the album of the humors of the part of the lacrimal gland, and place a patch on the thumb with butter and roll your hand over it.</start_of_turn
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And so penetrate the album of the humors and sit that the thumb has already arrived due to the wound.</start_of_turn
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And so measure the palm of the thumb to the preon of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black spot, which is the crown of the humors; that you may see that pupil with the vision of the humors for the clarity of the cornea.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And so keep the thumb inside the area where the humors are, and so put a bandage under another, and thus if the humors descend too much, the hours will remove the pain that was over the which the patient was seeing so much, and the thumb will remain in the humors.</start_of_turn
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And so rest a little while; therefore if the humors have descended, the hours will remove that other bandage which was put back because the thumb has not yet healed.</start_of_turn
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Therefore when it is dry and does not descend, the hours will extract the thumb easily, and roll your hand a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gem and with that wash the humors outwards; and then remove the thumb from the coto or stop or bandage with oil and gum and liquid with the humors.</start_of_turn
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But these things are of our time and we will pass over them.</start_of_turn
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your thumb at the entrance of the humors because of its toughness — for some men of whom the humors are tough — the hours cover that you take the sponge which is called the sponge of Albert which is the way:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so perforate in that area, and do not touch your hand in the wound, and do not do so if you do not see that the thumb has gone out through the joint.</start_of_turn
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And so remove the thumb as we have said.</start_of_turn
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must praise them for their work, both when they are prepared for the patient’s sleep descending pain which is in the place where they sleep on the two thighs in a dark house, and when they are prohibited from all movements.</start_of_turn
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest in the nature of the humors so that it is calm and quiet, and do not touch the thighs either to the right or left side of any kind.</start_of_turn
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligament be according to its custom within the third day.</start_of_turn
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And so remove that in that dark chamber and expel the cold sight, and make her see several causes, and then return the ligament within seven days.</start_of_turn
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not make the water flow in the hour of the treatments or at any other time.</start_of_turn
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	There must be enough water in order that the water may flow with pleasure without great or violent agitation.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if the abscess bursts by chance, the hours cover that you remove the thumb on the seventh day, and repair that which was conceded by the water which has escaped.</start_of_turn
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	The hours restore the sight of the eye and rest on the face of the mouth for which reason they leave them for a while in the dark house.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And so gradually remove it from that dark place and talk to her about her causes.</start_of_turn
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	The physician should know that in an emergency it is not excusable for the disciple of vision to leave a few vegetables unpeeled, and that you must remain vigilant during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And indeed we have reached the point where some say that in the Ayrac of Magdalene there is fire burning, which is confirmed by the fact that the water is sucked up by it.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Moreover, we have never seen anything like this in our land, neither have we read of it among the ancient; it is possible that it is new.</end_of_turn>
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the spices of magic by which one can perform wonders over those who are ignorant of them.</end_of_turn
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	Whether they are of air or of fire, or of both, and whether they are the emanations of them with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity is thus also like this.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXV.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	There is nothing in the world like the care of swine.</end_of_turn
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various animals born in the nose, some cause is found in each of them which is assembled like a scorpion's tail or like a many-headed serpent; and this disease is called polypo which is like that reptile.</end_of_turn
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is a swine that is cancerous, lapping, of yellow color; and it is a swine that is not of yellow color like a lion.</end_of_turn
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those lions which are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover that the disease be between your thighs and place it in the sun, uncover its wounds, and prick it once in those lions.</end_of_turn
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And immediately extract that to the margins of the wound, and immediately inscribe what you have comprehended from those with acute wisdom from the one side until you know that the whole animal is already exhausted; for if there remains any cause of the wound, the hour that you remove it is with one of the subtle instruments with which it is facilitated that no cause remains.</end_of_turn
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	More than anything, if the lord blesses us with salvation or an antidote to the wound, the hour you pause is when you cover it; or if it is of malignant boils, then cover and cauterize that until it is separated from the sacred and when the cavities are all empty.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And immediately take away the matter from the nose, immediately make the incision wide and open with water or wine.</end_of_turn
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Moreover, if the nose is opened and humidity proceeds into the palate, the hour you know that it is already healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Moreover, if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, the hour you know that in those pus that are under the nails of the nails to which the incision has not reached, there is no healing.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore cover that you may believe in it, do not touch it with your hands, and pause for as long as the finger or less, and do the disease and put one limb of the beast into the nails at the root or for another cause which makes it possible.</end_of_turn
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that is done, that you smell the odor which remains until it reaches the channels of the nails, and that it be expelled over the greasy substance, for it is like the action which the girls do at the school when they play, and it is a light cause of that which you want to make.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And immediately withdraw the two limbs of the beast, one that goes out through the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and immediately administer lukewarm water to the nails that are in the beast, and do that until you know that the nails of the beast are already at the nails of the beast.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And immediately extract the beast, and pause in the nose immediately after the separation of the sacred with a bandage, and do that for three days or more until the ulcer is corroded all that remains of the flesh.</end_of_turn
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And in the end of the disease, pause in the nose for a plum cannula for five days until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Moreover, if you neglect the treatment, use that one.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument which captures the maker of the cap, from which are distilled oils and medicines in the nails.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do that of silver or of gold, which is like a little lamp with its mouth open, like a little pot, and the meat is similar.</end_of_turn
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like that of a tube, and the cannula of the capturing instrument of the maker and make it flat, uncovered; to which you shall attach at the back of it that which you have when you take it from the oil or from the things which you want from the juices and from the substances which are subject to it.</end_of_turn
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This is the translation of the first sentence: I confirm that the translation is:
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	"About the causes of swelling in the extremities of the nose
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	"Moist and cold humors are the cause of swelling in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and manifested in four days within which it does not decrease in any way
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	"And for that reason, when you notice the beginning of this swelling, take action immediately, and eradicate all of it
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	"And immediately stop bleeding or cautery or medicine that is appropriate for the location of the swelling
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"But if the swelling has been delayed, even if it has become large, consider if it is soft, dark, of a yellowish color and with little sensation, for in that case do not touch that which is around the testicles; for moist humors rise up to that which has caused this swelling because of its great malice towards that which has suffered from it."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	"And if the swelling is of a tawny color and does not touch the testicles, and sometimes when the swelling begins, it is possible in all these cases, I evacuate the patient and apply that which is necessary, and care for the area until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	"About the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when the continuity is severed by plague or by suppuration
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	"So, when continuity is severed in one of these cartilages, little confidence is had in that operation except in the case of very noble people
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, when you must perform any work for some cause of these, consider whether it is fresh plague or old wound, and adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for that until it is healed."
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	"And if the lips of the wound have already been separated, and some part of the wound is still healthy, care must be taken to remove any surrounding part of the wound until it is healed
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And immediately adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle salt, and cover with lint, and place over the lint a piece of fine plaster, or another similar plaster, and leave it on for two days or three, and then remove the plaster and renew the dressing until the wound is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	"The manner of stitching is that you add the continuity of the wound or with needles just as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or you add the continuity of the wound with a thread just as you do with us and make known."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"About the extraction of that which causes swelling in the lips on the parts of the gums
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	"Moist humors must be brought to a state of rest in the parts of the gums surrounding the lips of these people, for there are some that are small and some that are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, you must convert the lips and wounds of any hardness throughout, and cover the abscess with wet lint until it is relaxed, and wash it with vinegar and cure the area with an astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"About the incision of the palate adjusted in the gums
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"Great numbers of moist humors do not exist over the palate adjusted which is why we formerly called it albulus, so suspend that with one hand or that you have the forceps and make the incision as you please, and leave the blood run or let it stop naturally."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And immediately stop bleeding with dry lint or other absorbent or excitative powders."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"And if the palate returns, immediately make an incision again, cauterize that, for that will prevent its return
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"About the reason for teeth that are loose with blood
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"When in the surface of the teeth of the gums and of the palate and between the gums there are adjusted hard scales, legs, and some of them are black and are harmful citrine or verdigris because the gum has seen corruption and is harmful to the teeth that are loose
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore cover that you have made the patient sit between your thighs and hold their head down, and scratch the teeth where the sores appeared and the cause seems like sand until no cause remains, and that is what causes the blackness and the yellowness and the rest that are modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If this is the last thing that is in the beginning of the reason, it is not good; and if so, then repeat the reason over those three days until it comes back to the last remaining thing you wanted
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth have needed diverse movements and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And thus the razor that is at the root of the tooth is different from the razor that is between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of shaving must be prepared by you:
Capitol .xxx.	(The text ends abruptly without completing the sentence.)
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Therefore when you have cured the tooth of its pain with all your skill and have performed the entire extraction of it, there is no cause that replaces the loss of it, which is a sublime substance until it is excused in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be covered that when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, you must certify that it is the painful tooth, because many veined pains deceive the patient and cause that he should not extract another tooth, and you should extract that and the pain will cease until the painful and sickly tooth is eradicated, as we have seen in the operation of the barbers
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you must certify that it is the painful tooth, and you know well, cover that you score on the circumference of the tooth with the spatula in which any virtue is to be found, until it is dissolved from the root of the tooth to the very end, and then remove the matter that is between the toes or with fine forceps from the beginning gradually until it is consumed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And so hold your hands firmly together for good speaking or stupidity, and hold the head of the patient between the painful toes that you must not touch, and gently extract the tooth according to custom without causing further pain to the patient or the greater pain you do not give
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	Therefore if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and put it outside from all parts so that you facilitate and expedite the extraction from the beginning
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or cracked, cover that you close that crack and strengthen that area with a fine wire so that it is not fractured during the performance of your operation on that area
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And cover that you work diligently with sacrifice around the entire circumference of the gum and keep your strength that you do not break that and leave it in its place, and return to the patient for the greater malice that is in the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And keep in mind that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their arrogance about the extraction of their teeth, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many veined pains cause greater suffering in great men than small ones, and the causes of these remain unraveled, or some of them, or that you extract that tooth along with some bones of the mandible just as many veined ones have testified
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And so the extraction of them should be preceded by washing the mouth with wine cold or wine vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows from the wound to help, just as many veined ones do, then wipe away any amount of blood and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not confirm that blood, cauterize it
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine needles that are useful for grasping the tooth at the beginning is of long handle, short handle and thick, in order that they do not bend when working
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And so sometimes of thick handle until you have practiced with them, they are not bent, they are short handled
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron, descending, and are made of twisted handles, and in the handling of these some teeth enter into each other and are opened by strong constriction, and some of them are shaped like the beak of a heron that has not been named, so that is strong, and they are of great constriction
Capitol .xxxi.	End of Manuscript
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the fractured mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the tooth is fractured and there remains any cause, cover that you pause over the area around the root for a day or two until the tissue is softened; and then apply some ointment or needles that are assembled like the beak of a heron called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them are affected by this disease in the same way as lime or almonds.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey me on this matter and do not grasp these forceps or handles, then you must lie down upon the root and scratch all the flesh away, and put in the instrument which has no name, for it is a small lever of this kind:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And make the large extremity a little short, and do not be ashamed of it, for it will not be drunk.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if the root is split, it is good; otherwise, help me with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is that of a triangle with the extremities of the foot together, in which there is any thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that of a triangle and of more subtle extremities
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you have helped with this instrument having two slopes of which this is the form more like the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which I will enumerate in teeth; for the aid of this instrument which is assembled like a great tooth, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular foot with the round or short heel, which is any thickness, and do not be ashamed of it for it will not be drunk
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other things that I must say of the teeth instruments are like the others instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artists be learned and skillful in the art, so that they may find for themselves the means according to what they understand of the operation and the various diseases; for these diseases of which the ancients did not say or even name their proper instruments, for the forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the jaw bone or other bones of the mouth be drunk if necessary, or if you put it away, then the weight of the foot should be supported over that place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help me with the management of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be of small size in any greatness, and let it be bound or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or run away until the bone is completely split; and then restore the place with convenient medicines as soon as possible.</start_turn>
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May the bone be small if necessary; however, reduce that of that which is black and care for that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.</start_turn>
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of the teeth eminent over the others.</start_turn
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course due to those which have a hooked shape, and especially when they tend towards the knees and towards the venerated toes; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is nothing like the others, and it is not possible to ligate or bandage it, then the root lies there; but if it is not annexed to another tooth, then you must apply this instrument which is like a surgeon's knife, and which is made of Indian steel of the extremity not too acute.</start_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be with the one in which you are biting that day for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not as crooked as the others.</start_turn
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to wear, then limate that with a file made of Indian steel of the kind we mentioned before.</start_turn
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let all be of Indian steel, the mark being quite apparent; and let there be from little points as with a file in which needles are useful, in which the tooth is gradually filed day by day with ease, so that no other tooth is crooked or falls out.</start_turn
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And so line the tooth at the end, and reduce that which is at the root of the tooth socket.</start_turn<end_turn>
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a part of a tooth is drunk and the tongue is swollen, then you must cover that until the swelling of that part is overcome and equalized, and be filled so that the tongue does not swell or the word does not corrupt.</start_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.</start_turn
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of teeth that have been ground down with gold or silver.</start_turn
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the teeth before concussion and loosening by percussion or extraction, and the pain does not go away with your treatment, then you must know that it is necessary to restore them with gold rather than with silver, because silver becomes green and soon turns black again, while gold never changes.</start_turn
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the faithful be firm in such subtlety and gentleness according to the quantity that must enter between the teeth; and the way of the incision is that you take hold of the faithful and take twice as much between two healthy teeth, and that you make two incisions at two angles of the faithful between two mucous membranes, or if one or two, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And immediately repeat the tissue inwards of the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand to facilitate and know when it is not mucous
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your incision be at the root of the teeth that you do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And immediately cut off the excess of the faithful with forceps or scissors, and add those to every place in the body, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the mucous membrane, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And thus lies that which was stretched like a Roman
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	More if it is slippery or wrinkled, strengthen that or those to the other faithful in such a way at all times
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the way of the teeth and the figure of the incision of two healthy teeth and two mucous membranes, as sometimes these are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you make that a tooth or two have returned, immediately close any opening in the places mentioned above, and let them recede as we have recommended, and that they remain closed.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Do not do anything except a good craftsman and wise person
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	All kinds of girls are suitable for any cause of the bones of the ox, and it is useful to them as a tooth, and is stopped in the place where the tooth is lacking, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves with him for a long time
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prevents that.</start_of_turn>
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes from behind the tongue towards some girls or is natural to which one says or which has happened accidentally by plague that has already solidified.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you burn the mouth of the patient, leaving no trace in the belly; and elevate the tongue and immediately incision that ligament nerve according to the width until the tongue is freed from its retraction.</start_of_turn
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	More if in that there is any hardness or denudation, and that is left for the consolidation of the plague, the hour you will give a cut and split that for the width until you have incised the ligament and the nodulation has been dissolved.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there be no useless fissure in the heel of the bone and that you cut here with care and come out clean blood.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And immediately wash the remnants of the incision with sponges or wine vinegar or with wet water; and then leave the tongue loose; so that it is not consolidated by any other girl.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	More if blood flows, pause over the raw wound; more if the blood boils, the hour you cauterize the place with a pointed cautery that you agree to apply to that.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately care for the other causes until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.</start_of_turn
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of wisdom from the tongue.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some girls accidentally leave the tongue post-traumatic resembling a small nail hindering the natural operation of the tongue; and when it is greatly inflamed it is difficult to perform the operation.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in it is that you burn the mouth of the patient sitting in front of the sun and consider the post-traumatic state.</start_of_turn
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if sometimes you see black or brown spots, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, the hour you do not touch that which is brittle.</start_of_turn
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, the hour you put on the thumb, and immediately incision that with a spatula, and cut it out entirely; and if blood boils in the hour of your operation, the hour you pause until the blood is clotted, so that it is not slippery, until it is retracted.</start_of_turn
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with wine vinegar and salt; and care for that which is left of the other care at that time until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol .xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of the bladder from the two ureters and from that which is nothing in the bladder and from the other appendages.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the bladder is full of urine, the glands which are together with the bladder often become swollen and painful, and are not emptied by two ureters. When you treat them with water as we have said in the division, and it is not healed, then you must consider if the bladder is tough, dark brown in colour, and without feeling, for otherwise do not touch it with iron.</end_of_turn
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of dark brown colour and the reason is great, do not touch it with the iron for the sake of the soul; take away that which is mad in the meantime, and if you cannot draw it out, break it with your hands or it will break by itself.</end_of_turn
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white colour, radon, and the reason is slight, then it is that it is likely to be a stone.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation for it is that you consider, before you perform the operation, if the bladder has already rested after the cautery or if it has diminished in any way; and when you have done this, take away the patient's urine from the belly, and open the mouth of the bladder, and the servant shall take hold of the patient's thighs and hold the instrument above the patient's chest.</end_of_turn
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And be it of silver or of gold, and be subtle as a coat.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Thus when you have promised it to him and he shows you the bladder, and you touch it on the belly, then take hold of the bladder once and leave it in its place, and pull out that which is outside as much as you can.</end_of_turn
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And as for any other cause of the tunics, and when you have finished with that, close the opening made by the instrument which we have described.</end_of_turn
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is closed with forceps, however the extremities are curved so that the orifice of each of them is in the middle of the other, not sharp, which is of iron without any teeth.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Or if this instrument is not available, you may use the edge of a sponge which has this shape: And it shall be sharp from one side, not from the other side.</end_of_turn
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having made an incision, make the other according to this manner, and when you have finished the incision, you must keep the patient from bleeding by applying cold water.</end_of_turn
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a flow of urine, keep water of decoction of poppyseed or of marigold close at hand and do the same in regard to the causes which we have mentioned until the flow of urine is restricted, and take care of that which is necessary.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And many herbs grow in the bladder other than two ureters, and you make an incision according to what you wish and as I have said in the incision of two holes which join together.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman who was suffering from a bladder which was born in her belly, which bladder tended towards a dark brown colour, little sensation, which had already closed the belly of her, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and had been forbidden from eating and drinking for two days, and was close to death if more water had not been given for a day or two.</end_of_turn
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the bladder had already suffered so much that there were two fist-sized wounds between which it was impossible to pass for two fingers.</end_of_turn>
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I cut fistulally and remained holding one of them once, and pulled out the other, and I took out a great part of it, and I closed the hole with my hand, and I held her tongue, and I remained holding the fistula.</end_of_turn
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I gave her a great deal of rest, and she did not urinate except for a little urine.</end_of_turn
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the bladder of that woman was completely healed, and she began to drink water again, and to eat, so I did not cease to treat her for that bladder, for a long time, and afterwards another bladder took the place of that, which I treated until it was prolonged.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I gave her wine and cauterized her belly, so that there was no more danger; and I went out for a walk and did not know until later that it was the day of the Lord.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvii.	The end.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the incision of the bladder when it is swollen.</end_of_turn
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh descends to the heel, and is swollen and prolonged, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part large and round, then it is called buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it has been cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not interfere with your treatment, then sometimes the burn already ceases to exist from itself and is subtle; in this case you should consider that which has been added round; and if it is of such length and is bloody, either of a yellowish or blackish color, and is not of a centimeter, then you should fear the infection of the wound, for fear of the disease.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner which I have said of your whiteness and length, that your wound should be made to be bad and swell, and put your tongue out from it like an instrument from which it proceeds and will remain fixed in the new one, then draw that out and prick it with one of the two instruments which are said in the infection of two wounds.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should know that you should not prick it except when it is adjusted according to the natural limit of its adhesion, for if you prick it more, you will cause it to swell more.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And concerning the infection, use the thing which we recommended in the infection of two wounds, and cure that until it is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	When the wound is spread by the infection, know that you should use an instrument in the cautery of the wound, for fear; and the manner of the cautery in the wound is nothing but acute water, that is to say, you should press down on the patient’s hand over the wound so that the wound does not swell, and immediately put your tongue out like the instrument which we have mentioned, and take some water which we have mentioned in the head of cautery, and comfort that which causes life, and stop that which does not swell or is subtle, and fill the cavity of the instrument from which this is the shape.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Whether the extent of the cavity in which the medicine is placed is like that of the cavity of a ray’s claw, and stop the instrument with the medicine over the vulva, the patient will lick on the side of the wound so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person flows over the medicine, so that it does not descend from any cause over the edge of the wound and that it comes out whole
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And you should hold your hand over the medicine and press that down on the uvula for a moment, until it is softened and calmed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a sponge and cover that over the limb of the ray, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and put the ray on the sponge in a tube so that the sponge adheres to that tube, and do that for as many times as you wish until you achieve what you desire from the cautery of the wound, and then remove that which has dried and fallen down about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you consider that you must repeat the medicine, repeat that, and keep the cautery away from the circumference of the limb of the ray, and modify that which is in the circumference of the medicine, and let it be washed with lukewarm water, and be treated with an ointment, and be protected until it is healed
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is more harmless than the infection and is longer in time.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Certain ointments are cured with that which is more subtle than cautery and infection, which is cured with fumigation in this manner: take cinnamon, rue, origanum, fennel, Arabic gum, chamomile, broth and similar to those herbs, and mix them all together, or some of them, in a bowl, and pour them on vinegar, and boil; and the vinegar should be covered with a cloth properly, and in the middle of the vinegar should be placed a nail, according to this manner; make it of silver or of iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the limb in the mouth of the wound until the vapor reaches the uvula over the nail, until the uvula is not opaque.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat over that vapor until it is dry, and keep that you do not make this treatment at the beginning of the episode of swelling, for it would be too tight in the swelling, and do not make that you make water, but declare the swelling of the wound.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	And if you do not have this instrument, then take a tube and put in the limb of the ray a piece of wool, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the wool of the wool prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	(End of text)<br>
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres in the wound and of the other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Cold humors adhere to the sole of the foot, or the heel, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Once you have grasped what is apparent, that is, what you see, then withdraw the tongue from the instrument which has been placed on the foot, so that you may know definitely what is in the sole.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and is hidden in the sole, that is, if the food has been digested in the stomach, which strengthens the cause which is related to the sole if it is forced out by vomiting; or if it is swallowed with a gulp of water or with some radish or bread; or if it is forced up with a sponge soaked in vinegar, and you bind that firmly with faith, and thus drive out the bad thing which is in the place where the spines are and it is extracted, for then the pain is forgotten.</end_of_turn>
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and bind it firmly to it, and be faithful, and place it on the table; or take a purse and bind it firmly to the foot and be faithful.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the pain has not been forgotten by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And make it larger than a small bean, and in the middle of it there should be a cavity into which you can put your finger with ease.</end_of_turn>
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And put a little elevation on his thigh, and keep your hand away from the groin, so that you do not touch the bone or the heel, or that the doctor puts his hand there.</end_of_turn
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient has swallowed more, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and its removal, then pull your hand away from the instrument with your hand, as much as is necessary until it is expelled.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	(End of document)</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of the purulent appendix from the sole of the foot.</start_of_turn>
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the pain of the foot is treated with medicines as we have said in the division of the cure, and it does not go away, consider the pain in the sole of the foot from the foot to the ankle, because you have compressed the tongue from the instrument which we recommended.</start_of_turn
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you sometimes see purulent matter, extract that which is once small or slightly soft decently.</start_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract that, take a curved needle and insert it into the sole of the foot, and place upon the curvature of the needle a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the purulent matter is dead and comes out of the sole) and abstain from giving him any food until the patient has recovered.</start_of_turn
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And give him a sponge filled with cold water, and put the mouth of it into that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow anything from that until an hour has passed, because the purulent matter will be as if it never existed.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However if it has not been expelled by that which we have recommended, then subdue the patient with a clamp or with an instrument which has been recommended for the ligation of the uvula.</start_of_turn
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do thus, so that it falls.</start_of_turn
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of performing this operation is to take a bowl in which are burned charcoal and cover the bowl with a cover which has a hole in the middle, and place the pointed instrument in that hole; and when you have kindled the charcoal, withdraw the cover; and put the patient’s mouth over the hole of the needle, and close the patient’s mouth so that the subfumigation is not expelled until you know that the subfumigation has reached the purulent matter, because the purulent matter will fall down.</start_of_turn
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall down, then repeat the subfumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and feed him with salted foods and the like, and do not give him water, and if necessary keep this treatment outside for a certain time.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which purulent matter from the sole of the foot is treated; it is similar to forceps in this way as well as in others, but it has a curve in it.</start_of_turn
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is equal to the sole of the foot, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a heron, which is hooked, in which it is grasped from five places, so that when it compresses any cause, that does not slip away.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And so other pains that are in the joints when they are crossed, and that are not matured according to their complement, are like those that are close to the joints, because the pain of the joint comes from the swelling of the parts that are in contact with it, and from the stretching of the ligaments or nerves of that joint, which is a harmful cause of contraction of that limb; or if the swelling is close to a main limb, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is mature, it does no good to the main limb; or if it is close to the buttocks, so perforate it when it is not mature; and do not perforate cruelly, but only that which is close to the buttocks, so that you do not weaken the root of the limb and that it is elongated towards the lower parts of the buttocks, and that there is a fistula, or that it is in the end that it is not healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and that is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it is mature when the pain and fever cease, and when the redness and pulse diminish, and the swelling becomes soft, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that you should perforate in the place where the abscess is lowest and where the pus comes from the care of the bulge
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation must be done in relation to the length of the limb or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the head or the feet, and in the place of the lacerations, of the nerves or arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use the perforation as regards that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is close to the bone, the best time is to perforate it only when the digestion of the abscess is confirmed according to the complement, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, you prolong the pain of the limb and its swelling, and the lips of the limb are hardened and the depth of the abscess is increased
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And so other pains that are in the joints when they are crossed, and that are not matured according to their complement, are like those that are close to the joints...
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should know that you should administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses, great perforation and wide or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And so other pains that are in the joints when they are crossed, and that are not matured according to their complement, are like those that are close to the joints...
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And so other pains that are in the joints when they are crossed, and that are not matured according to their complement, are like those that are close to the joints...
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And so other pains that are in the joints when they are crossed, and that are not matured according to their complement, are like those that are close to the joints...
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And you should know that in those that are not like this like common abscesses, you should perforate the one that is superficial, or only the plane.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And you should know that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you must perforate it and do not hesitate to remove all the pus in that hour; having extracted a part, and then put the abscess back inside the other day, and the next extract a greater part, and so on until it is completely healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And you should know that if the patient is of cold temperament, or fevered, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is resolved with the discharge of the pus, and it will be better for the patient, and you will perform the operation for him
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great caution, and take care when you perforate these abscesses, because you must remove the plagues and consider whether the plague of the abscess is small, or is a flat section, when you administer which of the two or both of the counter-measures; and if the abscess is large and the incisions of the perforation are many, you should cover that you stop working in any way until they are complete
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the armpit there is a separation of the brachial artery or it has been crushed in the limb, it is necessary that you immediately complicate it by tying a ligature around the limb above or below the fracture, as when one has carried out transpositions of bones or teeth, because of the humidity; and leave it for three days; then remove it and care for the wound until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If during the operation water flows out, immediately administer cold water and vinegar in which to immerse a piece of cloth, and place it over the area where the blood is flowing profusely.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, immediately administer support, care, and the powders that I have recommended in this place and in our division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter and the area of the wound is sensitive, immediately cover it with flour soaked in wine and oil, and leave it on the area
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the area is fleshy, immediately cover it with powdered herbs soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and keep it wet until the third day, as we have said, and then remove the dressing and cleanse the wound, administering the care that is necessary until it is healed
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of wound care universally, except as we have already said concerning the special treatment of each kind of wound
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 61
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the excision of wounds which occur in the armpit of the arm.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the armpit of the arm there are small wounds, and their tissues contain fat that is arranged in a certain way.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are full of pus, and from those there comes humidity similar to lime
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those there come substances similar to slime, and soft like lead
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the excision of all these, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you must know the extension of those does not cause harm to the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for the excision of these is that you grasp them with an instrument of the kind that you see, which is called a hook, until you believe that it contains the source of the pain
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if the source of the pain is humidity, then you must dissect it section by section in a superficial manner according to this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin by dissecting from the line of B to the line of G. When the humidity is evacuated, then you will remove that part which contained that humidity, and do not leave any cause of this, for if any remains of the cause remain, it will return again
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And immediately immerse the limb in Egyptian unguents, if available, or in water and salt; and fill it with that until the wound has healed, for that is what destroys all that remains of that part
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat this procedure on the limb until you are confident that no cause of the wound remains; then care for the wound until it is healed
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the wound contains fatty nodes, then you must pierce it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a saw having the shape of a cross, and take nails between two lips of the incision and extract the fat from all around, and exert your skill in the extraction of the fat that contains it
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your artery is causing you harm, then immediately tell me about it first
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, do the same with the excised and cared for wound; and the excision of a fat wound is lighter because there is little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And there are some veins of these wounds which are in the armpit of the arm of old women who have a lot of fat in the armpits; the cause of which is that I have seen no wound in the armpit of an old woman that did not swell up like a stone, rough, white, which could not be drained, and if there is any such thing in this case, cover it up
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other wounds of the arm, which occur in the armpits of children, and you must take into consideration the roots of the veins, except for this which has been said, for the excision of all these is superficial
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And suspend the perforation of those from the lower part upwards so that the body of the pain is relieved in the lower parts
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then take care of those things which are necessary for the care of the patient.
Capitol .xlii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Regarding the excision of scrofulas which happen in the groin.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These veins are seen to swell in the groin, in the ass and in the armpits; and some are also seen to swell in other parts of the body
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which swell in the groin, and those which are produced between them, and all scrofula of these is due to the loosening of their own tunic, as in the nodes and tumor of the head, as we have recounted
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are veins, some of which are single, and some which contain moisture, and some which are malignant which do not obey treatment
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore when you see in the touchment the color of that which is manifested is like the color of cod liver oil, and that it is bad throughout, and that it is not attached to the nerves of the groin, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not a pulse, because you will have incised that which is at the surface of the part from the part beyond the body of the line of G. between the line of B, and scald that throughout, and extend two lips of the cod liver oil towards once, or towards nails if you need them, as we have said in the tumors of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And take greater care that the vein or nerve is not injured
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the spittle should not be too acute, that you do not put your hand too close to the wound, or that you frighten the patient, and that you do not touch anything that is not necessary to touch; for if you touch the vein or artery you will prevent your operation, for when you pause in the plague wet with tears or other matters which remain flowing, open the wound and leave that which has rested to rest until the inflammation of the tumor has subsided and the wound has become softened and the patient has become calm
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound has been closed
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And in this way inquire about the belly and say if there is any other small scrofula, so touch them and remove them
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover that so that you do not touch that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then cover that with a strong fold of cloth and leave that until it falls down by itself spontaneously
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian unguents, and take care of that
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you touch the whole scrofula, then cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and keep them so tight that no fluid escapes.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If there is sometimes excess fluid due to the greatness of the scrofula, cover that you understand how to touch the root of that, and remove that and administer suture and what is said
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial puncture here where you see the mature of them, and stop the puncture of that until the pus comes out from under the belly of the body, as we have said
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer the puncture, pour water on it in the ointment and remain with it until the wound has healed, so that it does not break the corruption
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound has already become soft, then take care of that which is generated in the ointment until it is healed
Capitol .xliii.	End of the text
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Concerning the excision of the root of the tumor which is accidental due to the gut.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	I say that this excision in the pelvis has not been seen by anyone in our land that it has been successful
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of those things
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in the women there has not been quenching, cover that the extraction of the pelvis is avoided, as for that it is not of any use to the patient for all the veins and the greater part of the disease are there
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May in those who have eaten too much cheese in the mouth or garlic or two walnuts, when the disease is not in the throat, cover him with the section of epilhot to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore cover when you want, that they cut three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four at a little less than a section for the breadth in those who are between two circles for quantity, that the section be in cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, which is private of flesh and the vessels of sanctity are loosened from it
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, cover that when he extends the tendon of the heel towards the ankle, and open the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sanctity if you see them from any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And immediately cut him according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flame which is from that which comes out with that which is broken and for the evacuation of the voice
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is ripe in which perforation is feared, add two layers of the tendon of the wound, and so only will remain the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And immediately administer medicines that make the flesh disappear until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And say Albucasis that the sum of the words that we have recommended, exposure is nothing but that you see that from these eaten cheeses already the garlic of the disease has gone away, and the disease is overcome within death, and from it the ale is separated, and from these remain to cut into the epiglottis so that the disease can breathe over the place of the wound for any breath, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And thus I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice is from it for three days; and therefore I command you to close the wound when it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for my means is that a servant brought a jug and poured it into the ankle and cut a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to care for it, and I covered the mucus in the same way as it is done from the dead, and I uncovered the wound and covered the vessel which was sitting from the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	And thus I confessed that no vessel or nerve had been cut, and that it went away from the wound, and it healed within that that was sick
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not tell the servant if he did not recover in the voice, and thus after a few days he returned to his work with perfect health
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And thus I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section about eaten cheese which happens in the heel outside, and it is called hernia of the heel
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This great abscess which is called hernia of the heel is great according to the color of the body, and is not in the legs.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two methods, which is either natural or accidental
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one it is not the work of healing
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two methods of which one is like grass knots, and the other method is like a abscess which is caused by the swelling of an artery, and in this one there is fear
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not cover that which makes presumption of it like iron except in that which is small
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you shall know that if you find that which is similar to grass knots, and that is not suspended from any vein, then you shall cut that as if it were nodes, and extract that which is within the skin and the fat; and if not, the hour is prescribed to do everything that is necessary, and to care for the place with care until it is healed
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.</end_of_turn
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the species of nodes
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of these there are many species of nodes and I have already said all the species of them in the division
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And cover that I recommend to distinguish between a node and an extrusion as makes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And thus I say that in an extrusion there is fever and pain and great heat until the ebullition of the fluid is calmed; and it is completed by putrefaction that the hour stops the fever, the pain and the heat
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May it be known that this is neither a cold nor a feverish nor a painful sensation, but rather that which pertains to the spleen or the sac itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	It is according to the temperament of the body, and its commencement is like that of a cat, and is made just as when it is full or empty, and there are two species, one of which is fat and contains moisture, and the other is dry and devoid of moisture.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of the node, expel that which is excessive and inquire about that at the commencement of the pain, which is called the spasm, according as its form will appear in the head which is close to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	It is the manner of inquiring concerning abscesses and all nodes, that you grasp this pain and bring that which is in the abscess to the most humid place that you find in the abscess, and you will withdraw the strings said to be with that little by little until you know that the pain has already penetrated the cavity
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finally place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the excess and consider what is left in the cavity.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture, whatever its color, has been expelled, then you will make an incision on the surface according as I have said concerning other abscesses.</start_of_turn>
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture remaining from the intestine, then you will know that it is fat.</start_of_turn>
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this shape:</start_of_turn
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	just as you have been taught, and suspend that which is on the nails, and gently remove the cavity from all around, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.</start_of_turn>
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is fractured in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many blood clots adhere to that, and you will extract it piecemeal until there is no longer any cause of the fracture.</start_of_turn>
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the node will return according to the truth.</start_of_turn
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes there remains a small part, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and stretch the wound, and place over that which was the abscess, and care for the other treatment until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, then you will hold the two lips of it and care for that which encloses.</start_of_turn
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	For if the pulse is contrary to it, or is not pulsating, then you will cover and fill the place with soft wool that is seasoned and smooth that it is old and rusty, and you will keep that strap for two days or three until the wound has healed and the swelling has subsided; and then you will return to incisions that remain of the node.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLV.</start_of_turn>
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary pains in incision and perforation.</start_of_turn
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those three species are the forms of the intestines, and of these there are three species, that of these is large, and of these is medium, and of these is small.</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large intestine is as follows:</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium intestine is as follows:</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intestine is as follows:</start_of_turn
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Their pain is caused by iron, from aloes, from fallen limbs that rest appropriately, so that they restrain the intestines within the abscesses.</start_of_turn
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experience, and they are called acute, and one of them is called berid.</start_of_turn
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, of which one is large, one is medium, and one is small.</start_of_turn
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experience is as follows:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experience is as follows:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experience is as follows:</start_of_turn
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I believe that these are for those abscesses, exits and fistulas and swellings so that there are bones and other causes among them.</start_of_turn
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, soft, lions, just as if there were great needles with which the threads are sewn, and they are made of lead or of gold, or of iron, or of silver, and the thousandth part is when they are made of lead.</start_of_turn
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are said to be caused by black plum stones, which are remembered because for these the fistulas are opened in the cavity from which reflections rise, which are reflected back from their elevation to these reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds, some of which are long, others half, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of them
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Like the great experiment of the black plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Like the middle experiment of the black plum
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Like the small experiment of the black plum
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nails are of three kinds, some of which are simple, which have only one curvature, and others of three kinds: large, few, and middle
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them there are blunt nails, and of three kinds
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails with two curvatures, and of three kinds
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails with three curvatures, and of three kinds
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple nail, the form of it
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a middle simple nail
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple nail, the form of it
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a blunt large nail
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a blunt middle nail, the form of it
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a blunt small nail, the form of it
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large nail with two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a middle nail with two curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small nail with two curvatures
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large nail with three curvatures
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a middle nail with three curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small nail with three curvatures
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and burned, and of three kinds, for some are large, others middle, and others small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a middle scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The limbs of those on which the incision is made are acute, and the others are not acute, and they are not suspended in such a way, but rather because it is useful for the excision of the nodes, for fear of the incision of a vein or nerve, and for those it is healthy for the patient and brings tranquility when the adversion which finds itself in the excision of the abscess is overcome
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of medicines, and of three kinds: large, middle, and small, like herbs.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of large medicine
Forma de magda migier:	The form of middle medicine
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small medicine
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are useful for the ears and resemble the ray with which they are made of alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity pierced with a point with covered sponge and in that which runs to the parts inside and outside, when you will, as you see
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers of the hand that does the perforation of the abscesses and are not perceived by the patient, and are of three kinds: large, middle, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of these things
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of winds with which the flow of blood is broken, and of three kinds: large, middle, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are useful for the ears, round with some length, and are subtle
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And that these three kinds of winds must be taken into your great, middle, and small veins, in order that by these they break the flow of blood with speed, and when you first take them you will not find them to be medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	In no way should you use it to open wounds throughout the body, but only in fleshy places, such as in the cuts of the legs and buttocks, and in the cuts of the arms, breasts, belly and armpits, remaining like the fleshy cuts humid.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Many physicians consider these instruments and other small instruments that resemble sacks of seeds to be useful; for which the sacred is cut when it is useful for phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	These instruments are round in shape like this:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capital letter XLI.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Concerning the care of the breasts of men, which are made up of women.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some physicians are of the opinion that these instruments infla the breasts of many men; do well to give them rest when they begin to swell, and when they are swollen, gather the breasts together, and keep them still.</end_of_turn
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to anyone who suffers from this, command that he make an incision of the skin with a lunar section according to this shape, from the line of B to the line of G, and remove the entire lump, and replace the wound with a bandage of medicinal ointment, and adjust the two edges of the wound to the suture, and care for the inside that it may be healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so if the breast leans downwards towards the lower parts and is softened by its size as it happens with women, then cut it into two equal pieces like this, with two lunar sections, of which each contains the other, as the larger line includes the smaller according to this shape of the line B and the line G. And remove the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and hold back the swelling, and administer what has been said of the suture and the powders that are necessary for the cure until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not comply with the incision of what is necessary to be incised for the discomfort of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then command that you bathe the wound with a poultice soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that which is removed when the fat is dissolved, and care for that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Capital letter XLVIII.</end_of_turn
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Regarding the perforation of apostemas that are left behind after healing.</end_of_turn
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These apostemas that are left behind after healing are of the species of scrophulas, hard, which contain a sac.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture, command that they be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything has been evacuated from the apostem of the urine, then fill it up with old cloth and leave it like that until the next day.</end_of_turn
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with the old cloth, both the outer and inner, and cover it with convenient ointment until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the apostem of the species of nodes is, and of the scrophulas, then cut over that as well as we have said in the section about the scrophulas equally.</end_of_turn
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound is widespread like this, that is, if it covers a large area, then administer in it with a pointed cautery as we have said before.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	Capital letter XLV.</end_of_turn
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Regarding the incision of apostemas that happen by artery or vein.</end_
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the cord that is above that is consolidated, then move the instruments that caused the apostem. And it is known that these cause inflammation and apostem either by the artery or the vein: for when the apostem is by the artery, it is long aggregated in the belly of the body; and when it is by the vein, it is near the thighs where it sits.</end_of_turn
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is by the vein is round in the belly of the body.</end_of_turn
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And concerning the incision of this apostem, it is an error, especially when it is in the armpits, and in the groin, and in the heel, and in many places of the body; and it is not great, therefore command that its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.</end_of_turn
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More so concerning that which is for the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the cord section in the long; and immediately cover the section with a clamp and hold the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.</end_of_turn
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And now make a hole over that needle and make that penetrate into the other side, and stretch the thread firmly doubled in two places, — which causes the swelling to subside and extraction of two threads that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And now puncture the area which is between two ligaments and stretch the skin apart until the wound is completely healed, and dissolve the pus.</end_of_turn>
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And now give care in which poor blood is engendered until the ligaments are loosened; and care for that which is inflamed conveniently until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if there is pus due to a vein being cut, then hold your hand over the area which is near the pus until it is possible to withdraw the pus from the root, and make that penetrate; and stretch that thread firmly doubled until you extract that from the other side, and then ligate the pus with two sutures as I have said before concerning the two parts at the two extremities of the thread.</end_of_turn>
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Or if you fear that the thread will be torn, then make a hole with that needle over the whole of the pus from the beginning of the first needle, and strengthen the threads in four places.</end_of_turn
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the pus in the middle of the area where it is, when it is done remove the excess of the cord and leave only what is bound.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And now rest over the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and give the treatment which is suitable for calamine and inflammation until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter of the pus which arises from the twisting of nerves.</end_of_turn>
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus when pus arises in arteries and veins, and in a similar manner when it arises in nerves when it is caused by their percussion or by excessive handling, and for the like.</end_of_turn
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is more useful in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where there are painful joints.</end_of_turn
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the pus is dark, it is similar in color to the other parts of the body, and when it is strong it is very harmful, causing fainting in the patient like a stupor.</end_of_turn
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not advisable to remove pus from the belly of the body, so leave the cord in place, and it is better to leave it throughout rather than to remove some parts of it from before or after.</end_of_turn
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore in those who are in the joints it is not necessary to bathe in iron, because it will strengthen the pain there.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or in the front of the neck should be left with space.</end_of_turn
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if the pus is little, then you should leave it alone and remove that which is unnecessary.</end>
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you should suspend it with a bandage, and drain that, and then remove that; and suture the wound with sutures, and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .li.	Chapter end.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the excision of pus that arises from the heel that arises in the belly.</end_of_turn
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Thus the nails of those who are in the belly are seen to be very thick in the veins of those and in the other parts of the body of those who are affected by fungal affections similar to those which are in the fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head is large; and already the lips of those are withered, and it is of those which is little, and is of those which is not very large.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it were two ulcers which resembled fungi so much that there was no difference between them and the whites, of slight root.</end_of_turn
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were withered and fell off, and moisture ran from that all the time.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I advise you to apply ointment to that in the palm of the foot every day until nightfall.</end_of_turn and the other every day until evening.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And as for the operation concerning the incision of them, you must consider that if the patient is sweating, and the color of the nails is white, slightly yellowed, you must cauterize with the cautery in the fire because the nails which are to be excised must be expelled without leaving any flesh; and if you leave the flesh, cauterize that.</end_of_turn
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If sometimes the patient is pale and fearful, guard yourself from rash judgments; maybe the recent pain has ceased, and strengthen that which remains, for the manner of that is that which we have mentioned; and read that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And thus adjust in the stricture of the bundle of nerves; therefore, do not cease strengthening the great nerve until it is detached and falls away by itself as work is done.</end_of_turn>
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if it is of great reason, the hour of its initiation is any cause of fear and pain, especially in that which is in the belly.</end_of_turn>
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Maybe it is possible that you will dissect the greater part of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And thus care for that until the wound is healed.</end_of_turn>
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And guard yourself that you do not presume to dissect that which is of fatty color, of little feeling, of little regard, because that which is absolutely cancerous.</end_of_turn
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And indeed I remember this concerning cancer nearby.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lii.	The text ends here.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	From the care of eminent physicians of the umbilical cord.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminent physicians of the umbilical cord are useful for many causes; or for tears of the sac that is over the belly, and yes of it from them the cloth or the intestine according as it happens in other ruptures; or for healing of which flows from veins or arteries as it is said, or for wind that is restricted in them.</end_of_turn
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is for a tear of the sac and for the discharge of the cloth, the hour of the color of the afterbirth is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion that it is painful, and almost appears in various positions.</end_of_turn
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	But if it is for the discharge of the intestine, the hour of its situation is that which we have recounted, of much greater variety, and as you have previously said that which is hidden from us is occult, and almost returns; and it is very painful for it, and it is magnified by a great deal of blood and violent work.</end_of_turn
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is for humidity, the hour is lion and is not occult when we put our hand on it, nor is it constricted, nor is it wrinkled.</end_of_turn
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for healing, the hour appears like black spots receding.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is for nothing, the hour is difficult, great and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity.</end_of_turn
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is for wind, the hour touches them with lionness.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in them is that you consider the hour if the eminence of the umbilical cord is for the healing of veins or arteries, or for wind; the hour forbids that you take care of them, because in that case there is fear and pain just as I have said in the chapter where I said that the afterbirth is for veins and arteries.</end_of_turn
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the umbilical cord is for the intestine or for the cloth, the hour commands the patient to have the belly still, and be sitting extended; and command him to take hold of the umbilical cord around its circumference; and command him to place two hands over the two thighs; and command him to extend the greater part of the afterbirth to the flanks as far as one hand can; and command him to hold the circumference of the umbilical cord firmly or gently and according to the liar's manner.</end_of_turn
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And command him to cover the extended part of the afterbirth over the ligament and insert the thumb of your hand in that place and grasp the intestine; and if you have grasped it neither guarded for the ligament, the hour will extract it and expel the intestine from the parts of the belly.</end_of_turn
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have grasped the cloth, the hour takes hold of that once; and incisions the excess of it.</end_of_turn
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your veins or arteries, the hour surrounds that matter, and almost returns to your operation; and takes two needles and puts them in those two strong fields and inserts two needles in the circumference which you have made around the afterbirth in the manner of a cross, which will penetrate; and command you to strengthen the afterbirth in four parts over the needles.</end_of_turn
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and read the place until the fleshy part extends and falls by itself; or incisions that when it is subtle and falls down, and command you to care for that which covers the wounds until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel is swollen neither from solid matter nor from moisture, then you must uncover the abscess just as we have said and extract the solid or moisture which is in it, and then care for that which covers and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	When the swelling of the navel is neither from solid matter nor from moisture, then you must uncover the abscess just as we have said and extract the solid or moisture which is in it, and then care for that which covers and consolidates the area.
De curacio de cranc.	Care of the head.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division what kind of headache we are dealing with and how it should be treated with medicines, and that it is harmful to treat it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have already said that headaches are caused by various things and the care of them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the old doctors say that many headaches are caused by phlegm in the head, and that it is not possible to eradicate them, especially when they are in the breasts or in the womb and when they spread to the limbs, for they take away all that is around them, especially when they are just beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More when it is old and hard, do not try to cure it yourself, for I have never seen it healed by any salve or that anyone else has ever seen, neither that it has been overcome by anything
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it is when it is allowed as we have said, that you precede it by giving the patient laxatives and purging him of black bile for several days, and then apply the salve, if it is found to be present in excessive quantity
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for the operation in the way in which it is placed for the operation, and prohibit the occurrence of any cuts in the area; and condone thoroughly the area around the navel with wool so that no discomfort remains until the cause of the headache has been removed
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Leave the patient to rest, and do not touch or move him violently, press the areas, and wipe away the blood with your hand or with any instrument that you have at your disposal
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is great bleeding from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that immediately until the flow of blood has ceased, and then care for the other symptoms until he is healed
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 45.
De curacio de ydropici.	Care of hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned in the division the various kinds of hydrophobia caused by water, and their signs, and the care of them with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the kind of headache that is caused by worms alone, and it is not approached with iron like the kind of headaches caused by tumors or by hydrophobia, for these are deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this kind of hydrophobia caused by tumors with medicines and do not see improvement, then consider that if the patient has already achieved complete recovery from his headache or from another ailment, even if it is in his head or abdomen and similar to the previous ones, do not give him iron, for fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if sometimes the patient has excessive vomiting, and it is only this ailment and not another, and is neither young nor old, then the way to operate for it is that you place the patient between your legs, express his abdomen with your hand, fill his stomach with water up to the level of the nipples, and give him lobe of bitter herbs in this way:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	both in two sharp parts long, like lobe; however, do this gradually in small doses so that in the operation there is no passage into the intestines, and that you stop when you see that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydrophobia is from the intestines, for in that case you must remove the navel three inches from the flanks, in the direction of the navel
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of hydrophobia is from kidney disease, then your incision should be to the left of the navel for three inches
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the spleen, then your incision should be in the flank.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your incision be over the rib where the patient is vomiting, for fear of breaking the vessels there
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And pierce with the instrument the whole circumference, and enter into that incision, and raise your hand with the lobe between the rib and the stomach, and you will see that; if there is the quantity of a nail or two.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the sac until the lobe reaches the gut, and this is the place of water
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And thus extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or gold, and at the lower end of it is a small hook, and on the sides of it are three hooks: two from one side and one from the other side; and the handle is sharp as a pen, just like sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extraction of it is most necessary an armlet, because when the instrument comes into the water, then so much water flows over the instrument that it evacuates a great quantity of water at once; for if you evacuate less than this in an hour, there will be much more pain for the resolution of the spirit animal, or from the fivepi which is proximate to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	More should be evacuated according to the quantity of the virtue of the instrument and according to what you understand to be the provisions of the patient's virtue and the goodness of his blood.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And thus extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes this, because so much of it is retained by the codena which retains the hook which is over the navel which you must perform according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And thus repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and make water for a few days for fear, and keep yourself from error until there remains no more water except a little
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear about the patient, and you see that the water has become great, then care for that which is buried in fine sand, and mix yourrrh in bath, and to the sun expose for a long time; and care for that which is medicinal drying until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the melsa, and press firmly at the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	End of treatment.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Concerning the care of children whose urine sacs are not perforated
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the girls of these children are like that of their mothers, and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is slightly torn or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore cover loosely so that it is not perforated as much as is born with a little spur of water following this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place on the tear a plum plummet of lead and ligate that, and keep it for three days or for three quarters of a day
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him urinate freely; and when he has urinated, return that
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead there, it is possible that the urine that comes over the place will not reach that clamp
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the tear is slightly torn is to be medicated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for several days until it is strengthened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the tear is not in its place, that is to say, that which cause is that the one which is born has the head of the spur pushed up so that it cannot urinate downwards, until it raises the spur with its hand to the parts below; and this is not a vice, for the sperm cannot reach the mother according to custom, and is a bad disease for the woman
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in them is that the patient is placed over the two hips, and then extend the head of the spur of the bladder with your left hand with great extraction, and pierce the head of the head of the bladder of the place of the navel with a sharp instrument, as if it were written with a pen, or that you remove any part of it, so that the middle of it comes out resembling the head of the bladder and that the tear falls into the middle place as it should cover
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And take care that in your operation of flux of urine, which is dangerous, that you do not cause any accident; and pause it when you see it bleeding, and care for the wound until it is healed
Capitol .lvi.	End of book.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Concerning the care of the one in whom there are accidents in the prepuce, in the head of the bladder, and of corruption, and blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the bladder.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times these accidents happen in the bladder and are an eminent vice of the flesh
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of these one is malignant and the other is not malignant
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, because you suspend it with a single pin and evacuate it when it is whole; and put a little ointment of Egyptian unguent over that; and do that until it is healed
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the swelling is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer cautery close to the origin and in proportion.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Even if the swelling is in the prepuce of the great toe, not circumcised, and half of the swelling is inside the prepuce and half outside, it is necessary that you burn the swelling that is inside before it solidifies; and when you have cured that which is inside, that which is outside will also be cured, because when you cure that which is inside, the one which is outside will not be left hanging.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And indeed, these accidents happen in the groin and in the prepuce of the black or corrupt; where it is necessary that you conquer all that is already decayed and that is about to decay or that is already corrupted; and immediately apply over that which is close to that which is well, which is made with fine flour of millet and with fine salt and pepper.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And immediately treat that which is alongside the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an influx of blood, then administer lunar cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the healing cautery is in two positions together, that is to say over the blood and over the corruption when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the toe is corrupted and is destroyed in an hour, it is necessary that you insert into the meat of the prepuce a catheter of lead so that the patient can urinate through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the prepuce to the head of the toe (and this adherence does not happen except in that of which the prepuce is naturally attached, and over which circumcision is not required; and when adherence happens by corruption or by swelling) it is necessary that you excise with blunt forceps until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the toe is freed throughout.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them completely, it is necessary that you excise with blunt forceps any cause of the head of the toe and the prepuce, and you will help so that the prepuce, when it is soft, is strongly perforated by its softness itself
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And immediately separate between the prepuce and the head of the toe with a thread of silk, which already is wet in the cold water so that they do not adhere to another wound
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And immediately treat with wine styptic until it is solidified
Capitol .lvii.	End of text.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Treatment of children and care of what happens to those undergoing circumcision
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity as is the other diseases: however, since it is our operation and our will, and since in children it is to be done properly, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way less suffering loss of life.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their free times, because they did not find it in their laws, and it is not but that we have learned by experience, the cause of which is that I have found that the majority of the artificers and barbers use to circumscribe and mutilate with new instruments and with nails; and they use thread for ligature and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I myself have already practiced all these methods and I do not find a better mutilation with forceps, with thread and nail than that which is done with nails, for in mutilation as with the nail the cord is more easily expelled, since the cord of the prepuce is doubled over two tunics, and the tension is more left behind, and is strongly forced outwards by another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the mutilation which is useful for almsgiving, and which is digital, which is used by barbers, the incision of the extremity of the member is not followed, because it is strong enough to enter the cavity of it
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However in the operation with the nail, it is seen that the force is observed more clearly and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and most of the times it does not need mutilation in this way, and I have seen that
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Except for the mutilation that is done with forceps and thread and needle, the pain, experiment it with me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for which reason the acute pain that is expelled is as much as the acute pain that is left; and therefore when you press your hand so proportioned there are two acute pains, and I incision according to a comparison in a time; and it is useful to compress the thread with a figure containing the cord of the toe from all sides, to which there is no risk of any error of any kind
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first method of the operation is that you make the child groan if he is one of the small ones, do not do anything else but simply tie the thread in his toe alone, and keep him under observation for that day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And so do that which is agreeable in all that manner which is within your power, that is to say that which you can receive with your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And thus do that which is agreeable in all that manner which is within your power, and do not be senseless; and hide the forceps in your hand or let them rest upon the foot, so that the child does not see them or any other instruments.</end_of_turn>
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And thus do that which is agreeable in all that manner which is within your power, and bring your hand to the groin and blow in the belly, and pull out that which is inside until the head of the groin is ejected, and then soften that which is added to it from behind.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And thus do that which is agreeable in all that manner which is within your power, and bind the limb signed with faith doubled, and bind further below that a little according to his ligament, and say to him "I will leave this place and will tell you where the ligament is, so that you can keep it well retained, and insert between two ligaments.</end_of_turn
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thus do that which is agreeable in all that manner which is within your power, and raise the belly gently and stretch the head of the groin; and read his pulse slowly and gently, for it is better; and stop powder from falling and place powder on the powder place where there is spread dung of humors with conches filled with oil recently burnt; and leave that there until tomorrow; and care for that which is being cared for until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The way of the forceps to be softened, this is the way:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the one be blunt at the tip and the other be sharp, so that it does not hurt the nail, and let the length of the two acute angles be as long as the length of two thumbs equal.</end_of_turn>
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Better an error in softening is that the intrinsic cord of the groin should be left whole, or a part of it should be left from the incision.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore you must extend that from your hand towards your nail before the apostema of the limb and that you make that according to equality.</end_of_turn
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, the hour extract that from the flesh and insert it there.</end_of_turn>
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Better if three days have passed, and the groin remains swollen, the hour you will read that which has entered until the apostem of the burn is cede, and extract that with ease, and insert that which is prepared for you.</end_of_turn
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard yourself from the head of the groin, for it will not go with it.</end_of_turn
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore care for that which is concerning that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.</end_of_turn
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is said of the groin to be measured, and you obey those things, then you will not notice it.</end_of_turn
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And better care for that which we have said until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the care of retained urine in the bladder.</end_of_turn
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is useful for full bladder pain due to gravel or for gangrene with congealing, or for weakness or for wound, and it is like those things which we have said concerning the methods of care in the division.</end_of_turn
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention is due to gravel which is already in the belly of the bladder, the hour you must encourage the patient to lie down over the buttocks.</end_of_turn
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And thus do that which is agreeable in all that manner which is within your power, and put the foot of the patient over the two buttocks and extend the foot of the patient from the part below the two buttocks, and the patient will strain the buttocks as much as possible.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore the hour the belly of the bladder is constrained to expel the gravel backwards, because the urine is complete.</end_of_turn
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with that which we have said, it is useful to know the cause of the patient, the hour you must administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called a siringue, which is like this: of silver or of hammered gold, just like a pen with a needle having a round head like a palm and a half, to which be put a tube transparent in the head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting the urine for that is that you take the faithful doubled and tie in the limb of the needle or knot for good ligation; and insert the limbs of the faithful into the part beyond the syringe, and insert into the holes if there is any cause of the knot, more than insert into the needle with force. And so increase the syringe with border and with an egg of humors.</end_of_turn
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient cough violently over the pelvis, and embroil the testicles with a rough cloth, and olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And immediately put the tongue into the throat to facilitate the descent of the epiglottis; and bend the epiglottis downwards to the level of the embolus; and grasp the tongue with your thumb and index finger; and grasp that with the thumb and index finger of the other hand, so that the patient may be relieved of the pain without further injury, for this is not good in this case, but rather in the part where the torment originates
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually loosen the thread with the small loop, so that the urine flows from the loop.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and make urine, and use the tongue, do not desist from using the tongue, and use the tongue until the bladder is evacuated and the patient experiences relief of pain
Capitol .lix.	End of treatise.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	What is the quality of the cleansing of the bladder with a clamp and the like instruments that are suitable for this purpose?
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or it is swollen with blood clots, and if it is necessary to evacuate urine, then it is permitted to use the clamp, which is as follows:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And if the patient is deaf in the extraction of the urine, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three incisions: two from one side, thus twice.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is liquid, in which is what is enveloped, and according to the quantity that fills that, is its addition. And when any cause is removed from that which is in it, is expelled, and when it is expelled, with water is expelled, and when it is expelled long, as the clamp does in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to evacuate humors from the bladder, insert the clamp into the humor, and expel that urine which is filled above, because the humor is expelled in the concavity of the clamp
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And immediately insert the clamp into the heel according to what we have recommended in the tongue; and grasp the humor with water which grasps, because that humor goes to the bladder as soon as possible, and the patient is relieved of that pain
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the subtle crystallization of the bladder, and that is the following shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is sufficient for silver or gold, of which the cap which you put on top looks like a small plume, and leave it there without a ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take the bladder from movement, and stop in that place the humor which you want to crystallize in the bladder, and grasp that between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and scald that humor over the fire
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And immediately insert the extremity of the crystallization into the heel
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And hold your hand over the bladder with the humor in a descending structure until the patient feels that that humor has already reached the bladder
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present, then take a fist of rags and make a circle of that; and pierce that through its whole circumference; and immediately insert a strong thread through those holes, even if it is twisted; and add the circle again as it is added to the ointment, because you have stopped in that water which you want to expel humors from, and oil and vinegar.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And hold that thread there in the instrument and make that as you have made with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humor reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	End of treatise
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stones and their care with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the phlegmas and stones generated in the bladder, and we have mentioned those things to you
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the stone in which we do the operation with the hand, and section
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The bladder stone properly is that which is fixed in the bladder
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I have narrated that which is the exhibition and abreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the stone which is generated in the greater bladder mostly appears in children; and concerning its signs is that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient has frequent pain in his heel, and limping steps, and is dressed like this; and in that water there is a clot in the bowels of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	It is laughable that the healing of children in that age group who have reached puberty is difficult; and it is even more difficult to cure the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More often in the young is it milder because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that of which the foot is greater and the cure is lighter; and if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we arrive at the cure of that, cover at the beginning of that which we must modify so that which modifies the patient's complaint which pulls out all the wound that is in the bowels; for that wound many times seen prevents the infection of the foot from the inquiry of it
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And also take hold of the patient's complaint at the thighs and with hands and fingers so that the foot descends to the groin or that it comes out from the place through some wounds
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And do that quickly between your hands prepared, and the most of them will leave the cushions of their legs, so that the whole bladder is left to be emptied downwards towards the buttocks
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And so do all that is required and all that is necessary.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the foot in the space, then you should cover it so much as possible with a section over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not touch it completely, then cover that with oil, saying with the left hand, if the patient is a child, or saying half if it is a young adult complete, and enter that into the buttock
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And do all that is required of the foot until it is left to rest
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually bring that little thing towards the belly of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that which you have said, and expel that to the outside of the limb from the place from which you took the section
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister with his right hand to extend the buttocks outwards, and with his left hand to hold the coccyx which is left behind the buttocks, in the part where the section is made
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so do all that is required of the vomit being incidental to this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and split it in it where it is between the buttocks and the buttocks, not in the middle part, towards the left side of the left cushion; and the section be made on that foot and the thumb be said either in the buttocks or in the heel, and make a transverse section, for that the external section be wide and rather narrow according to the quantity that comes out of the foot so that it is possible and not greater, than that which would compress the thumb which is in the heel of the foot because of the section, and that is very painful.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the foot is every angle and margin, for that its extraction is difficult because of that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that which is like a lion in shape, and is round, and is difficult for it to escape.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if that is the one which has angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus forced, then cover that with your hand, or that you strengthen over that with your hand which is properly stretched over the foot, and do not escape from it; or that you enter with your hand the instrument which is of curvature of the limb.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	More if you do not succeed over that, then enlarge a little the wound, and if you see flow of urine, cut that which is bitter treaded.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	More if the foot is more than one, then at the beginning you will push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and approach it; and at the same time push a little bit of liquid; and it will be like that if there were two stones more
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the foot is a great stone, it is known that you should make a great incision, for that occurs to the patient two evils: or that it stays or that it causes it to discharge urine continuously, because its limb is not consolidated at all
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	More administer the expulsion of it until it is expelled, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps until you extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with the fat of aloe and with the oil of drago, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And rest upon that bandage soaked in oil and urine, or in oiled rosemary and fragrant water, so that the afterburn of the cautery is softened
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then support the patient on their hips and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has burst, soak the area with water and oil, and then care for it with diaphontine and ipecacanth until it heals.</end_of_turn>
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If the plague happens to cause an abscess, adhere and soften it, and if it appears like the abscess has frozen, urine is prohibited (for it is known to cause the escape of the substance from the bladder), therefore extract the said organ from the plague and remove that substance, for if it remains it will cause the bladder to burst and corrupt.</end_of_turn>
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with wine, water and salt, and against all spices, with what will help to heal it until it heals.</end_of_turn>
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover in all the hours of treatment that you lie down both thighs and adjust the medicines that are placed on the area.</end_of_turn>
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the marrow of the bone, and is fixed in it, and the elimination of urine is prohibited, then care for it with water as I have recommended until it comes out, for it is said that those who are treated for this ailment are accused of causing a miscarriage; and I have already seen that to be the case. Take a needle of iron and this is its shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a triangle extended outwards, acute, fixed in the butt.</end_turn></start_of_turn>
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take faith, and bind that the bone marrow leaves the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.</end_turn
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And extract the iron from the bone with a perforation, facilitating the needle until the needle comes to that stone.</end_turn
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And move the needle with your hand over that small stone until you have pierced the perforation through to the other side so that the urine can flow freely.</end_turn
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then place your hand over what remains of the stone from the part where the perforation was made, for that is drunk, and is thrown out with the urine, and the patient is healed.</end_turn
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if this treatment does not please you for any cause that prohibits you, then bind one thread to leave the stone, and another thread to remove the stone.</end_turn
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And place a cautery on the stone in that bone between two bands.</end_turn>
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract that.</start_turn></end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And remove the bandage and bandage the wound with ointment, which is useful in the plague.</end_turn
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to bind the thread to leave the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other thread to remove it, for when the thread is removed alongside the stone, the cord returns to its place and the plague is cured.</end_turn
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason when you remove the thread, elevate the limb above the level of the heart, or that it returns to its place, and cure the plague as we have said.</end_turn>
Capitol .lxi.	End of Document
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of stones from the bones.</start_turn></end_of_turn>
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A little stone in the bones is infrequent.</start_turn></end_of_turn
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	And if you see a stone in any of them, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by experienced people.</start_turn></end_of_turn
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The other is that the strong limb is almost withered.</start_turn></end_of_turn
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a bone that is completely sound, since it breaks if you put it into the doctor’s hand when it is hardened, or is one of the bones that has marrow.</start_turn></end_of_turn
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a bone that is completely healthy, especially the operation with the hand.</start_turn></end_of_turn
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in the bones is far from the location of the stone, for fear of causing a displacement, and in that there is danger.</start_turn></end_of_turn
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if you need to do it, take a large bone that is completely sound, and little is found.</start_turn></end_of_turn
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	And if you do not have that, take a large bone that is soft, or present a matrona bone that is fractured in the body of the bones, or a bone that in this art has already lost a part of the art.</start_turn></end_of_turn
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore do that present, and command him to do whatever you command him to do from the beginning; for the reason is that he regards if the woman is a virgin, for in that case he must put all that he has said in his arse and wants the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find that, cover that and leave him saying that, and command him to insert it on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	May be if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert what was said into the belly of the patient and over the stone, because she puts her left hand over the bladder and grasp that well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find that, then command gradually to pull that out from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below until it reaches that at the rate of the cushion.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And thus insert upon that the suspicion of the greatness of the belly must reach the rate of the cushion of whatever part is at that place and hold the stone in that part, so that his word is not deceived by the stone remaining in their bowels.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then introduce the ray upon that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in the section according to the quantity that you know the stone will be generated from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the species of stone are flecks: some are few and large, and lion and asp, long and round, and haven ramp.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know what species are of them for what you sign about what you wish.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see discharge of blood, adjust in the old wound treated and hold it for an hour until the blood has ceased to flow, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make that you prepare your instruments as those which are said in the extraction of the stone in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see discharge of blood, and you know that the discharge of blood is from the bladder that is inserted, then you must pause powder upon the place and open that which is powdered and stricture descended, and do not proceed further; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for it will strengthen the belly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And take care of the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the urgency of the blood has ceased, and the place has become soft, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of the section about hernia of the bladder.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Urinary hernia is nothing but the accumulation of humidity in the white sac which is left the codena of the genetia containing the urine, and is called a cystocele.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some women have it in their own natural cavity which nature has prepared for them in the part of the urine, until it is known that there is already another urine; and it is the codena of the genetia between the white sac which we have said, and it is not water but pus
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is for excessive pressure which happens to the genetia, because at those some of this material is infiltrated; and some women suffer from it because of a painful blow given on the genetia
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for its color may be yellow or citrine or bloody, or orange, or black feculent, or white liquid, and the latter is the best.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of water is in the white sac which we have said, are that when it is extracted it is redon declining a little in length like a figure of urine, and appears the genetia, for the humidity contains that throughout
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own cavity, then when it is extracted it is redon at the part of the urine and by this it is estimated that there is already another urine
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the codena of the genetia and the white sac, then it must be left behind
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And as for the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you should describe the color of the humidity in the extraction along with the substance from which the form is preceded; and according to what is left in the remnants, judge of what is contained in it
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the care of it, we must command the patient to be flexible if it is possible, and sometimes to lie down completely
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And thus rest upon the seat of two persons for any reason a little higher, and pause leaving them unmoving.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And thus set your hand on the left side of them, and command the minister to follow the right side of them, who extends his thumb beyond two fingers to the groin and to the part below the navel
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And thus take hold of a spanner and split the groin of the limb from the middle towards the heel to the length of the fifth finger.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And thus make the incision according to the rule at an equal distance from the line which should mark the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white fat encompassing
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And thus extract that, and observe, and keep me informed that you do not perforate that; and your excision is like the one from which you extracted, just as if it were suspended with the greater vessels and written on the excision according to the quantity at your disposal
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And thus perforate the fatty tissue full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And thus separate between two layers of the incision with nails, and stretch the fat to the edges; and do not touch the groin of the thighs encompassing, and perforate the fat in that manner that is at your disposal
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And thus perforate that in its entirety or in pieces, and more especially the large veins superficially, because if you do not carefully observe the incision of them, it is not worth the security that the water does not return
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the water proceeds from that outside of its cavity in the hour of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the fat, return that back, and adjust the two layers of the groin of the thighs with sutures, and care for that as for the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the water corrupted by another disease, when you have recognized that the blood vessels which are their supporters are sore, extract the water, and care for that as we have said before
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is gathered in two equal parts, it is known that there are hernias; therefore perforate that part as you have done with the other equally; and if it is your opinion that it is an operation, then do it
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And thus dry the wound, and enter into the incisions with fine silk soaked in olive oil or in scented oil; and pause for a while another piece of silk which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two thighs and the belly; and pause uncovering cloths doubled and powder, and tie those over as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and thus take two cloths and fill them with twisted thread according to this pattern; and secure the extremities with which it is accustomed to knot or with wet thread, and add them to the structure at the groin of the thighs, and one of the extremities in front of the heel enters into the two, and the second front to the part below the navel, and two extremities over two thighs and two extremities on two ankles, and all the tightening is adjusted at the groin of the thighs.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And thus this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and it is that you take a pointed cautery fine and that you perforate that with the groin of the thigh, and that you ignite it as we have recommended until the white fat containing the water is discovered, and when you take the cautery in this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And thus perforate that fat, and it is ignited until all the moisture is driven out
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And thus stretch the fat with nails, and extract with nails, and extract with pointed cautery ignited; and perforate that as you are able until you have drained all of it; and keep me informed that the fire does not touch the water
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more safe and more long-lasting than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if in your practice you find opposition to cautery in the hour of incision or in the hour of cautery, or flux of blood, know that you must care for whatever adversity happens to you for that, with care which you are accustomed to give them as it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the disease is slight, and you do not hope for the second operation on account of its horror, know that you must perform the perforation as I have recommended to you; and it is when you are confirmed that indeed this hernia is harmless.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And know that you must place the patient on any elevated surface, and then perforate the abscess in the lower part of them with a spanner, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	The opening sentence translates to: "And let the opening be wide enough to allow all the water to drain out."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the ankle and leave the other two limbs open, so that the water remains inside.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care that the wound is healed when the plague is finished
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	More likely is that if an emesis is to be made at that hour, you perforate that [joint] only when a white speck is seen in the orifice of the plague, for it hinders the discharge of the water; therefore if you must break open the plague, do so with a needle or some other instrument from which the water is extracted from the abscesses, or adjust the opening of the plague to a small size
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is increased approximately every six months or in early spring; and when it is increased, the joint should be pierced according to that manner, for the patient will then be free of pain for several days
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 163.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of the section concerning carbuncular hernia and its treatment.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section concerning this hernia there is great fear of loss of sensation in the major limbs; for I have seen the diminution of these and their restoration by that means.</end_of_turn
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation in this and the signs of the abscesses.</end_of_turn
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that abscesses arise in the parts where the genetia is composed and is caused by various causes: or by excessive acute moisture which is spread over the genetia, or by percussion.</end_of_turn
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the abscess is according to the color of the limb, and is not found without pain, and is a hard abscess.</end_of_turn
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the soft abscess is fluid, of which the color is dark, and is not solid.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Certain herbs are useful for the swelling of arteries, and for the inflammation of those already perceived, or for the inflammation of veins.</end_of_turn
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More likely is that in the case of inflammation of the arteries it is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press that part towards the thighs mentioned; do not touch that.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And that which is useful for the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause except for pressure.</end_of_turn
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that concerning this species it is useful to make an incision and over the others meats; and that you insert the hook of the genetia, and slightly stretch the skin of the parts below, and extract that from the white pulp, and remove the pus from the veins, and ligate them, and insert more pus than you extracted from the entire parts of the limb.</end>
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the limb is already softened in those meats, then you must extract the pus and insert that.</end_of_turn>
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence for any cause of the pulp, or between that which is between the veins, then you must remove all that adherence and insert that by incision.</end_of_turn
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	More likely is that if there is birth of meat behind the adherence which is from behind, then you must insert all that is of it, and extract the pus just as we have said.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, let the plague be filled with soft wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and take care of that as well as the other care that is necessary until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 164.</end_of_turn
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia that is of the wit.</end_of_turn
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess covered by any covering resembling a sprout with the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult for the patient to exercise and walk because of the pain.</end_of_turn
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease is to be afraid of what precedes the recollection.</end_of_turn
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However we must say the operation in this case is fierce from the first.</end_of_turn
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that you must place the patient upon a high cushion; and slightly stretch the skin of the testicles to the lower parts; and insert the hook of the genetia into the groin with the veins that are proved by the worm; and have those other attendants whom you desire, and extend those with violent extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And thus pierce the abdomen with a sharp lancet through the belly of the veins until the veins are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And thus extract from every part as much as you will have said in the extraction of the intestines which are in the temples
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And thus leave in those a needle which is firm and double, and tie one at the first place where the wound happened, and the other at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And thus pierce those in the middle of the limb for a broad incision according to the length of the limb, and extract what is added of the foul and corrupt humors
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And thus care for the wound like for the other wounds in which you wish to generate healing so that the veins which would otherwise cause two genitures do not fall off, which is not bad because of that.</start_of_turn>
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Maybe if the wound happened to all the veins, it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles for that reason be equal to the veins, because they are without any nourishment for the incision of the veins, and that they are established or that they are equal so that they are not useful with those.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .lxv.	End of document.</start_of_turn>
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	From the care of an intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that extends over the extended abdomen from the flanks of the navel of the belly, because by giving way the bulges of that rupture will reach some of the bulges.</start_of_turn
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is of the peritoneum or of excessive movement of the gut, and these two species happen for various causes: or by percussion, or by vomiting, or by crying, or by elevation of any serious cause, or by adhesion.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is for extension of the peritoneum, is that it happens slowly over a long time, and does not happen immediately, and is accompanied by swelling within the abdomen to such an extent that the peritoneum compresses the gut.</start_of_turn
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is for incision of the peritoneum, that at the beginning it causes severe pain immediately; and is accompanied by swelling different from the apparent one leaving the navel prominent, and that is because of the displacement of the gut, and the body of the intestine at the edges of the peritoneum.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And many physicians forget about the gut the membrane, and call this intestinal hernia external.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some physicians are faulty with winds, and some physicians run in the gut a wound, and here it is retained, and it is in this that great suffering of the disease consists, and some physicians make it worse by causing severe pain and more so when pressing.</start_of_turn
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the care of these two diseases it is necessary to fear, for that one must avoid the treatment in that.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the gut with his hand to the depths of its concavity if he obeys your return order, and then you are to envelop him over the navel between your thighs, and elevate the legs of the patient.</start_of_turn
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And thus stretch the cord which joins the testicles to the depths, and pierce the cord of the testicles throughout its length; and then fix at two points the edges of the incision as much as you wish to open the incision with those.</start_of_turn
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if it is possible according to the quantity that you are able to do that from that the blood is forgotten.</start_of_turn
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And thus extract those bloody clots which are left on the cord of the testicles, until the white tough peritoneum of some part is uncovered.</start_of_turn
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you will enter the gut as said in that in which the testicles are between the white peritoneum, which is left on the cord of the blood, and between the peritoneum according, and will remove that adhesion which is in the back of the blood.</start_of_turn
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And thus hold with the hand the cord of the testicles at the edges, and with the left hand extend the white peritoneum outwards, and elevate the blood towards the incision; and command the minister to extend the blood outwards and you will dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the solution accomplished.</start_of_turn
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek among the intestines that there be no cause of the gut being covered in the tough white peritoneum.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	Maybe if you find it in the belly you will leave it there.</start_of_turn>
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And now take a needle which has a thick point of about six inches, and enter with that the one which lies under the testicles, which is below the codena of the testicles; and cut straight; and then prick the parts surrounding the point which enter until they are four inches; and then make an incision over each figure in the manner of a cross; and tie at the end of the needle which is under the testicles so that it lies firmly with two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And immediately cover the parts of the thighs and tie them securely so that no blood vessels which nourish them are compressed, so that no swelling occurs from here on afterwards
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And leave another bandage as much as three fingers' breadth further away; and then put two ligatures loose from the heel of the foot to the point which is below the codena of the testicles as much as the length of the finger; and prick all the rest according to the roundedness, and leave them there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And prick at the back of the testicles to cut the part which runs from here to there, so that it runs smoothly just as we have recommended in what we have said before
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And give immersed lanolin in oil, and place it on the wound; and give the ligature which we have recommended (and several white plaguas are cauterized, which we have said above in order to prevent the flow of blood, for several plaguas happen to fall away).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Even if the case is delayed, the cold water must be applied, and place it on that which will fall away when it is ready as we have said before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound like the care of other wounds until it is healed
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.</start_of_turn>
De hernia ventosa.	Of windblown hernia.</start_of_turn>
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia nothing is seen that has been omitted in its care.</start_of_turn
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And first say that it is useful just as we have recommended in the hernia that is at hand; that is that you tie the blood vessels near the section above that facilitates them; and dry in the middle area around the wound until the blood vessels fall away.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the wound as we have said until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.</start_of_turn
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation which is useful in the ankles.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veins break in the ankles as we have said, and examine the area.</start_of_turn
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not cause the patient any cause of pain at the knee; and if you cause it, it is little; and return immediately.</start_of_turn
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if it is prolonged, adjust the fracture in the heel until the bone is displaced from the heel; and this is because the heel is stretched, and therefore the bone is softened and the area is swollen and examined.</start_of_turn>
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the care of it is like that which precedes it.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And several wounds are cured with iron in this manner: the patient sits on the seat of his thighs between your two hands, and dry the area of the rupture of the bones examined with a section for the width according to the quantity of three fingers.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And immediately strengthen the white bone which is under the testicles until it is revealed.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take the thread and place it over the prominent part of the heel, and hold that at the navel.</start_of_turn
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And tie the two prominent parts on the extremity of the thread of the heel, and adjust the suture so that one is against the other.</start_of_turn
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And pull out the extremity of the thread, and do not puncture the heel from all sides, nor extend the blood, nor any other cause as I will tell you in the care of intestinal hernia.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And take care of that like the care of wounds, and as you prick the veins, soften that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the bone is contracted and is not adjusted the prominence of the rupture.</start_of_turn
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And it is better in this place, for it is more likely to be healthy.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.</start_of_turn
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the testicles' cord is thickened by stagnant humors, the surrounding tissues become softened thereby, and this is regarded as beneficial for them.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When necessary, it is required in the treatment of these cases that the patient be placed in a comfortable position, and that the entire thickened cord be freed from its natural position; and that two fingers be placed at the suture site to hold it in place
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, in the beginning the excessive swelling of the thickened cord can be reduced with three or four sutures and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then the sutures are inserted between the sutures; and care must be taken to care for the other wounds until they are healed and the pain has disappeared
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.</start_of_turn>
De castracio.	Of castration.</start_of_turn>
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Wisdom teaches us that castration is forbidden in our laws; however, I recall it from this book. It is not necessary to recall it except for two instances. The first is when the physician is questioned about it; for he must know how to cure it. The second instance is when we must castrate other animals for our benefit, such as horses, pigs, goats, and the like.</start_of_turn>
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Therefore I say that castration is useful in two ways: by traction or by incision.</start_of_turn
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	As for traction, the way of working is to hold the animal in cold water until the testicles become softened and limp and hang down.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take hold of those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to touch.</start_of_turn
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And as for castration by incision and section, you must hold the animal and grasp the testicles with your left hand.</start_of_turn
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the ligature and pierce through each hole with a section until two holes protrude.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then pierce those which appear to be swollen.</start_of_turn
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not neglect any cause of swelling, but rather the subtle one which is on the vessels.</start_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better than traction, for traction often leaves some cause of the testicles to cause the beast to desire to bite.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.</start_of_turn
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the care of hermaphroditism.</start_of_turn
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: when the space between the testicles becomes filled with fluid in which two testicles appear in which there is a space like a female in which there is a seed.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some say that the cause of this is the urine which is in the testicles' cord.</start_of_turn
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women it is a kind: and it is that the known woman has on her tenth a little like two testicles of a man and a little like a man's testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three kinds of care: two of the men and one of the women.</start_of_turn
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Therefore you must insert those meats adjusted until the mark of that has escaped is expelled, and take care of those with care for the other wounds.</start_of_turn
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	As for the second kind of men, of which there is urine in the testicles' cord, there is no care or operation in them.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</start_of_turn
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the limping and the prominent thigh in cases of women.</start_of_turn
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The strong limping is adjusted for natural causes until it is relaxed and is beneficial to her; and some say that it is increased in many women as much as in men and during coitus.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore you must take hold of the limping with your hand or with a bandage and insert it.</start_of_turn
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not hesitate at the beginning of the treatment, especially in the groin, to prevent the flow of infection.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And do not neglect to treat the wound until it has healed completely.</end_of_turn>
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	A wound is never born in the horror of its mother until it has filled all its parts according to its measure (for thus, too, we call the first pain "acute disease"); therefore we must approach it cautiously as we would approach a wound slowly, and heal it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxxii.	(End of text)</end_of_turn>
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of rats.</end_of_turn>
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	A rat is one whose female does not have a hole (perforation) or has a small hole (tract).
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.</start_of_turn>
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is when there is an underlying disease which has preceded it, or when it is caused by an injury or for lack of adjustment or for a wound or swelling.</start_of_turn
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused in the groin, in the belly, in the flanks, in the buttocks or in the thighs, and it prohibits lying down, standing up and sitting, and it also prohibits menstruation.</start_of_turn
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of this disease is useful for the examination of the belly, if the swelling is evident, it is sufficient; but if it is not evident, then you must search for it in the belly or in the flanks.</start_of_turn
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the swelling is caused by a wound, and if it is in the groin, then you must cut and divide that.</start_of_turn
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you must place your hand over the flanks and over the belly, indicating by this that the most is inflamed.</start_of_turn
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the female should lie on her side, with her thighs extended, and you should extend the flanks with force until that wound is broken and the swelling is opened.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take a sponge and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and hold it there until the area is healed so that the wound does not solidify.</start_of_turn
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the wound is large and thick, then you must cover it with lard or with a piece of myrtle.</start_of_turn
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is for cartilage, then you must suspend it for a while and then cut it.</start_of_turn
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if there are medicines that stop the flow of infection, such as vinegar, saffron and balm, adjust them with vinegar.</start_of_turn
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And give a wide needle of lead so that the wound is not solidified too soon.</start_of_turn
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and apply cold compresses.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And do the other treatments for consolidation until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And many times an injury in the belly does not cause other wounds, and you must treat it according to this method.</start_of_turn
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if there is a hernia of the bones, the hernia of the bones which is in the belly is not usually treated in any way.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxxiii.	End of text.</start_of_turn>
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, piles and red swelling that occur in the groin.</start_of_turn
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized by the veins of the rectum that continue to bleed continuously; and when they are ancient hemorrhoids, they are healed by themselves.</start_of_turn
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said about the varieties of these and their signs, and I will say that those which receive treatment and those which do not receive treatment.</start_of_turn
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the groin and do not appear to the patient, do not require treatment with iron.</start_of_turn
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the belly about which there is a sensation, are cured.</start_of_turn
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must put the female in a cold bath and extend the thumbs with the nails or with rough hands, and cut them with the scissors.</start_of_turn
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And so sprinkle over those knees the flow of the sacred oil from one of the unscised blisters, thus as with acacia and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And so soak the swollen feet for an hour, and then stop them in cold water.</end_of_turn>
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of the sacred oil persists, then make decoction with vinegar and mustard seeds, barley and honey and similar things.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And so give barley bread and comfort it with honey and vinegar and make ointment with water over two of them.</end_of_turn>
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the sacred oil is evacuated, it is well; otherwise, make adhere to two sponges, and to the breasts their sacrifice.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And so take wine and immerse that in the juice of marjoram or the juice of arnica or the juice of gentian with a little wine and make adhere to the place; and take care of the place until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	More strong is the one which is rough regarding that which I have said in their nourishment.</end_of_turn>
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 164.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an abscess that has happened in the heel.</end_of_turn>
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of abscesses arise accidentally in the heel, thus as millet and abscesses lapident, ulcerous and carbuncular, infected and eroding, fistulas bloody, hemorrhoids and boils and other abscesses.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their species and their signs, and their treatment in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I say in this treatise of abscess that comes in the heel when it is of the abscesses which accompany healing, and if you wish to know in what manner this operation is made of them.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore you must consider if the pain of the abscess in the heel begins acutely with percussion and spasm and fever, and sometimes when it relaxes and if you touch over that the feeling, the hour does not suffice for the perforation of it, and take care of that which helps about the maturity until the acute of the accident ceases.</end_of_turn
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Therefore you must make the limb cease on a cushion that has two cushions; and recline on the heel two and adjust the swollen feet to the part beyond the belly, and the thighs are spread out, and stop the thighs from the hips down to the ankles, and tie whatever is convenient.</end_of_turn
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And so the midwife follows behind the flank and administer the instrument with which the opening of the heel is made, the form of which will come in those causes that will make it necessary.</end_of_turn
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And so when you administer this instrument, you must stay with the ray of the heel of the limb, and what comes out of the instrument from the heel should not be more than the ray of the heel and should not wound the patient.</end_of_turn
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the ray of the heel, then you must sprinkle powder over the surface of the ray of the heel to prevent the insertion of any instrument into the ray of the heel.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And so you must pause the vertigo that runs in the instrument of the flank as it comes out and that the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vertigo until it is opened up to the opening of the heel.</end_of_turn
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the exudate comes out, and is touched with the hand and is lion and soft, then you must stop that which must be covered with a bandage.</end_of_turn
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healing is evacuated, then you must stop on the wound a swab dipped in olive oil or green oil in which there is any stiffness; and stop the pressure on the incision in the heel.</end_of_turn
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the heel and over the wound clean wool soaked in water in which are boiled mallows.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound for two days until it is healed.</end>
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And many times the heel is washed and the wound is rinsed thus with water and honey, and sprinkle with water in which lilies or long-stalked parsley are boiled, and then return to the bandage.</end_of_turn>
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is hardened in the heel by the treatment, then you must be prohibited from treating it with an instrument, having taken care of that which has been said in the division.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	The matron should be taught in what manner they should bribe physicians in case of unnatural figures.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the matron should know at the outset the natural figure of childbirth for her patients, for when she sees the woman expressing from her parts and wants to smell her air, and this is done because of what is above her, she makes her vomit from the part itself, and she makes her suffer from the excess of it. But when that part is naturally formed, as it is on the navel, and the second one at that or below or hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these symptoms, it is necessary to compress the belly of the patient so that the embryo comes out gently from the navel, and it is said to be corrected by these superfluous matters with good management.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May it be known that no other part is unnatural and unusable, for when the embryo comes out through the feet and the body comes out before the head and the feet, and the hand or the foot is placed below, or at the heel. Or the head comes out with the hand or at the belly, and it is converted into the navel, and it is like the unnatural figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the matron to be learned and skillful in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	I have shown you all the figures of these things, and what is the art in these things so that it is significant for what it is and has been from what it comes.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fact comes out through the navel for natural evacuation, and that is vehement upon the woman and is useful to her, and sometimes the virtue of the thing is already weakened, then it is necessary to do that which the women have, and to evaporate the shame of them with praise and with fragrant ointment.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And immediately insert the matron between these thighs and make a small incision at that place, or cut off that with her nail so that it runs out what is in her of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Moreover if she does not come out, it is necessary that the woman be sprinkled with mucus of eggs and mucus of fennel with cinnamon.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And order her, order her to compress her chest and do what is necessary to make her vomit; and to put her mouth and nose under her for an hour, for thus the fetus will be driven out as much as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are driven out at the beginning, it is necessary that you reduce them gradually little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Moreover if she does not obey the treatment, it is necessary to place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, and immediately support the cushion on the ground; and the woman should be supported so that she does not fall from the fall.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the things are not done diligently and the fetus dies, it is necessary to cut open the fetus and extract it immediately or bind the corpse to her hand or extract it with an equal measure, for thus that which is driven out will be forgotten
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Thus from this time on until the fetus comes out through the thighs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes out through the thighs, it is necessary that you support those who are around it, and immediately make the fetus smaller, and that you grasp that, and that you take hold of a limb of it and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Moreover when they are inside the thighs, order her to vomit and make her vomit with force, for if God wills it, that which is driven out will be forgotten
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten in what we have recommended, it is necessary to return the fetus gradually until it pauses in its natural figure, for thus that which is left will be forgotten with delight.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden in all that we have recommended, it is necessary to take vinegar of alum and gum arabic dissolved, and to strike all over the belly for good bruising, and immediately give the woman wine of courage.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And immediately make her vomit in vinegar water, until she comes to her senses.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts of her feet are softened, it is necessary to apply to her a fumigation of myrtle and stop that for her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when an hour has passed since the fumigation, order her to lie on a cushion, and make her vomit and stretch her mouth, take away that which is there, and press the lower part of her belly with light pressure, for thus that which is left will be forgotten entirely
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Immediately from the foot over the buttocks and the thighs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot lies like this, then you must engage your thumbs into the smaller parts little by little; and at the same time keep the heel of the foot raised over the buttocks, and the feet hanging downwards, and those rest upon the thighs, and complete your thumbs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And at the same time press gently over the abdomen little by little, and extract what is left from the heels of the feet until it is ready in the lower part
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not relaxed, then take hold of the feet and move them violently, and at the same time press gently over what is above the knee little by little until the foot returns to its place
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then engage your thumbs and gradually reduce the foot, and command the heel to go down until the foot is relaxed
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Immediately from the foot laterally while one of your thumbs rests.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Just as much as you can reduce the hand, even if you cannot reduce that, then raise the heel and let it go down.<end_turn>
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it does not go down, then make the heel rest upon the thigh, and with your thumbs press the parts of the limb violently, and at the same time administer oil which you will have previously recommended and mucilage.<end_turn>
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the swelling is great, then make that which is above rest upon the chest, and at the same time study the reduction of the hand, and grasp the foot according to the natural figure, and make the heel go down and command that it compress itself until it is relaxed.<end_turn><end_turn>
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Immediately from the foot over the buttocks expand your thumbs and the surface of the foot is at the level of your major thumb.<end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the mistress has the foot and at the same time you rotate that little by little, and this will facilitate it.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is as it should be and when it is sufficiently relaxed, and then pause over the heel of the foot where we have recommended oil and mucilage.</start_turn>
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command them to move little by little, and when you have finished that, make that which is above rest upon a cushion and command that it be inclined towards the outside, and command that it be compressed; and make that which is below go down again.</start_turn
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared for exit through the wide opening.</start_turn>
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they are horrified of the great one in this way, consider, and then you must insert your finger into the vagina until it is evacuated of moisture.</start_turn
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended upon the face and the heel is stiff, then you must insert that of the navel, so that it is not retained and remains.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And at the same time pull the foot towards the flanks until you pause that which covers it, and command the heel to compress itself several times, and the sirrah will go out immediately with joy, if God wills or no.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or many feet.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	The wise ones say that spotted twins are born together, and sometimes four or five are born, which is strange and often does not survive; however, this is not always the cause, for sometimes it is for the will of nature, and not for life.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And tell them, even if they are multiplied, one after the other, that they are separated by the tip of the cord, distinguish those between the intestines in the navel of each one of those, and each one is delivered just like a foot naturally joyous, and so there are several delivered like this without labor as we have recommended.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult at delivery, you must make them with violence until they have reached what we have said of unnatural figures, then you care for them just as we have recommended.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mistress is cunning and makes what she does with ease and tranquility, and with a delay, and is ingenious according to the whole figure as she has prepared it from the threatening danger to health.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that they are formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women have their periods in a major one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and sometimes ten times. And it is enough for me to verify that a woman does not have her period every six times, and another ten times in total, which causes great pain for measurement of the glorious scholars.</end_of_turn>
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquella parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol .lxxvi.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	De extraccio del fet quan es mort.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ella es temuda perdicio
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	E·l ministre tengua aquella de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual homeward queden les uncis en le fet
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e diagon la ma en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	E aprop pause e diagon la apposicio de lu un altre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquella; e aprop extratz aquella entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels outros instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	It appears that the sentence translates to:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the affection is great and the swelling is coarsened, break the beak [of the bone] in such a way that the moisture contained in the foot is expelled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not be complicated, nor will it obey these things; however, you must inscribe the affection as much as possible according to your skill
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if there is a belly swelling or water in it, you must pierce that through so that the moisture contained in it escapes
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Though the affection be on the soles of the feet, the attraction of the legs is slight and the direction towards the mouth of the mother is slight
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Though it is coarsened, break the belly and foot; however, you must extract that which wraps around your hand, and that you break the belly and foot so that the moisture which is in them escapes
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Though the other limbs are relaxed and the head is turned towards the left hand; though the mouth of the mother is gaping, insert your hand into the armpit, and grasp the affection there, and pull that affection towards the mouth of the mother; and immediately insert under it one or two nails, and pull them towards that.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by swelling, do not cause further swelling by applying excessive pressure; it is better to administer an ointment of greasy humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Administer compresses; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the affection is on the side of the thigh, it is possible to do an agglutination: and administer what we have said about the affection seen in the living person
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If this is not possible, pierce in the heel and extract it
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of discomfort for the second time.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your operation, administer what we have said about post-operative care for the swellings that occur from the mother
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If there is discharge of pus, discharge in styptic waters and administer the other care
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And indeed I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead, and I have carried out another pregnancy in the same place, and indeed the other pregnancy is dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to me sometimes after childbirth in the thigh; and I must break it open when it is full of fluid, and I begin to vomit blood.<end_turn>
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to care for her, and I treated her for a long time, but the plague was not solidified
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I left her with some strong compresses, and I pulled out a bone, and I did this for several days, and I pulled out another bone; and I was amazed that there was no bone in the belly
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.<end_turn>
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I left the plague, and I extracted from her many bones, the woman exists in her thousands, disposed of in this way for a long time, without seeing such a thing before
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not dare to believe that this was strange, but that in this is science and an assistant to provide care with the hand of the physician.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	As for the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.<end_turn>
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	A way to see that the mother is opened up.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the way to grasp the bowels, to which two incisions are made at the extremities of two thighs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this incision must be made with more care than of a strictor, and must be made either with a needle or with a pair of pliers or with the head of a boy
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each butt is two fingers and the margin of both is one finger; and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two buttes there are two adjustments of that middle butt which have already been bound, the length of which is half a palm and a little, and the width is two fingers, or a little more
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additional things are introduced into the mother's mouth to keep it open when you rotate the two prescribed emetics.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that of that thick and light pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Both the discharge of fat and that of urine, or both according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May, however, at the end of it there are two additional things which are sometimes added, and the length of these additional things is like a palm, and the width of each is two fingers wide
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you wish to open the mother, then make her lie down with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And bring your hand close to the instrument as if with forceps, according to the quantity that you wish of the appreciation of the mother's mouth so that the meteron does what you wish
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of vomiting which they call the ancient ones:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The way of pressing with which it is pressed together with the foot:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The way of vomiting with which the head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps to which teeth are set at the end, sometimes, and several hairs are added like this as with forceps according to this form, sometimes, to which teeth are added like teeth of a saw to which is applied and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The way of vomiting little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The way of vomiting like a single horn having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The way of vomiting like a single horn having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The way of forceps to which teeth are set with a handle by which the head of the vomit is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The way of vomiting having two extremities to which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The way of two spatums wide:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercises, and when more are multiplied of that kind and are prepared, you must make the artificer, as much for the curiosity of your operation as for the people for its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not do anything with those instruments either here or there, for their necessity is not excusable
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained you must encourage it, then command the patient that he should retain the seed, and then make him vomit with condiment, and put your hand over his mouth and over his nose, and if with this it comes out, do not be surprised
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an emetic and pierce a hole in the covering with a needle and place it in that herb which opens the mother's mouth, as with camomile and rue and saffron and rue marigold and cassia lignea and balsam and myrrh.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the emetic, and place that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And bring close a canula of gutta into the mother's mouth, and keep that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make him vomit as we have said, and the second one will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	And if it remains close to this care and is not expelled, then command the mistress to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in buttermilk of almond, and then introduce that into the chin and let her grasp the second one with that, and when that has been found, then take the emetic and extend that little by little, because if it is attached to the belly of the mother, then introduce your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract that little by little following the rule so that the mother does not suffer excessive pain
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Be careful that it should be changed from the right side to the left side with ease
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And be adjusted in the quantity of attraction, for she will obey and avoid adhesion
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, as we have recommended the care with vomiting and with emetic of the wave with herbs
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then you must know that it does not escape from her to the mouth of the mother, and bring that to the attention of the matron; for that will make her endure that for some days and it will be dissolved and will be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	May when the body becomes poor, there is an elevation of bad odor at the head and in the stomach, and this leads to the disease; and therefore we must administer sub-fumiguous and convenient remedies at this time.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Indeed, the ancients already resorted to sub-fumigation with rue and dry figs.</end_of_turn>
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The instrument for which the female is sub-fumigated is due to the retention of menses and the second [menstrual flow].</end_of_turn
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Whether by seeing or feeling.</end_of_turn>
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the inner limb be grasped in the groin and the outer limb on the fire, and let the sub-fumigation be performed over the shoulders of the fire.</end_of_turn
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that which is within consumed by that sub-fumigation and repeat it again.</end_of_turn
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Take care of the buttocks of the unperforated child.</end_of_turn
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Move the children away and their buttocks are not perforated, which already suffer from heat and swelling.</end_of_turn>
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore let the mistress know that we must perforate the said area; and if not, perforate with a sharp needle, and keep guard that it does not touch the nerve.</end_of_turn
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and keep the area warm until sensation returns.</end_of_turn
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is swollen, pause for a while in the groin a needle to expel the days, and stay until the child can walk.</end_of_turn
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And indeed, the swelling of the buttocks occurs for the consolidation of plague or abscess; therefore let that consolidation be allowed to subside, and then care for it with the remedies and salves that we mentioned for care and soothing.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Care for the fistulas that arise from the joints.</end_of_turn
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise in the lower parts of the limbs are nodular and bulky, which arise from the buttocks or from the space between the buttocks.</end_of_turn
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or swelling.</end_of_turn
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that nodulus is old and softened by the moist white or yellowish pus, and some herbs are applied to these fistulas, some of them penetrate.</end_of_turn
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known for expelling pus through the opening and for breaking up; and some physicians use the disease of expulsion, and they expel it violently from the fistulas.</end_of_turn
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from these fistulas some herbs penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the heel; and some penetrate into the groin and into the armpit.</end_of_turn
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And it is known that the penetrating fistula penetrates the buttocks and not the non-penetrating fistula; that is to say, your master has told you that the fistula is in the buttocks, and when you want to remove the pus from the fistula, do so with a needle when it is soft, not when it is tough.</end_of_turn
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If it is tough, then enter with a needle of plum or horsehair until you sit on the needle or put your finger on the spot.</end_of_turn
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not sit on any of these things, nor does any cause of egestion or vomit or wind arise, as we have said, then it is certain that it is not penetrating, and you should resort to care.</end_of_turn
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates the bladder or into the meat of the heel, then the significance of these is the emission of urine from that place and the prohibition of that until the location is consolidated with medicine.</end_of_turn
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates the groin or the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then the sign of it is that the needle has pierced here if it is not tough in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the limb; and that it is softened throughout; and that it is not suitable for this treatment, nor is it consolidated with medicine.</end_of_turn
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure for all, and the cure for these is the work and uselessness of the physicians concerning which they are forbidden.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that which is not penetrating and does not regress, healing with a needle is expected as I have told you, and that which I have already tried.</end_of_turn>
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the disease makes the patient groan between his thighs and raises his legs into his chest, the thighs are inclined towards his belly, and he puts his hand over his belly, or he puts a needle of plum or needle if it is tough in the fistula, until he believes that the needle has passed through.</end_of_turn
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If the patient groans around the belly, it is necessary that you enter and grasp his belly with your hand.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you sit on the hand which you wish to uncover, the hour has come for you to sit between the hand and the loin or hip, for it is certain that this hand is penetrating; and do not work there, for it is not in that place, as we have said.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But indeed I say that it is better in this case.</end_of_turn>
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the medicine by which healing is expected in this case, it is that you burn a pointed cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before, and you insert that burn into the fistula until it reaches around the belly; and then repeat that two or three times until you are certain that all those meats which are adjusted in the fistula have been adjusted.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And take care that the dressings are wrapped around the edges so that all those meats which have been adjusted are embraced, and take care that the medicine which produces and consolidates the flesh is given, and if it is healed, well and good; but if not, the hour is not healed at any other time by any other treatment.</end_of_turn
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the hand enters and does not penetrate inside the belly which is in the loin, and between that and the hand which is visibly of flesh or fat, and sometimes the fistula comes out on the surface of the knee, the hour is to dry the knee from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dry on the hand, and be dry in the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the extremity of the hand is, and the hand is thus freed and released.</end_of_turn
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And finally keep those meats adjusted in the fistula which are assembled like a bundle of feathers and do not remain from any other cause.</end_of_turn>
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Indeed if there is an influx of pus sometimes that comes between you and your operation when you are sidelying those meats, the hour is better that it should be with fire or acute medicine, for the cautery of fire adjusts good doses of matter: so is the adjuction of those meats adjusted and the exclusion of the pus except for the excision of the humors.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And take care that the dressings are wrapped around the edges or in the cause of tearing until the place gets stiff, and take care that the hour takes care of the wound as it engulfs tough flesh generating and consolidating.</end_of_turn
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines in which there is both stypticism and excision; when the hour is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear repetition.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Indeed if the fistula has already gone inside the belly of the loin and is elongated from its surface of the body, the hour enters and grasps the hand in the loin and inquire about it.</end_of_turn
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you hold the hand and between you and it is visibly of fat or flesh, and it is proper for the penetration, the hour is not an operation in it but rather by way of trust and hope.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Which is the cause that you administer in it in three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said; or you drain it so that you can reach the concavity in order to grasp some of them and the treatment will be more effective; and do not proceed with the incision except that you remove the lactam that contains the belly, and that you order the patient to lie down immediately when the sensation of the illness subsides; or that you lengthen it somewhat and expel that pus which you dry out in the belly, as we have said, or by means of the hand or another acute instrument, and finally you modify those meats adjusted in the incision which are in the excision to which you adhere; and finally urge you to restore the entire wound by means of the incision, and if the purulent discharge has not been consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the loin, and if there is still pus in the wound, you will be glad of the illness.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished according to this manner: when you enter your hand into the fistula, and it is in the flank of the loin around the surface of the body at the knee and on the margin of the loin, the hour tries to perforate the extremity, which is as if you were preparing the layers according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	... and you insert your hand with a veil of flesh or around those things; and then insert the hand with the veil in the fistula until you reach the concavity of the belly.</end_of_turn
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Indeed if it is penetrating at the margin of the loin you must extract from that hole as soon as possible; and you grasp the hand in the loin; extract the limb from the veil and adjust the two limbs well, and bind each one, and rest for a day or two, and when you feel that the flesh has healed sufficiently, bind well again that which is between two limbs of the veil which contain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And promptly treat the swelling until it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Even if the fistula does not penetrate, nevertheless it must be made to penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, for it is not to be left in the groin, because that would cause you to inflict damage there unnecessarily; and promptly treat that until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The way to cut the spinos that cause the fistula: the curvature of which is neither too acute nor too obtuse, so that you do not inflict damage unnecessarily, even as often.</end_of_turn
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of wounds in which the silk runs smoothly from the incision site.</end_of_turn>
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Wounds are of two kinds, those that are between the buttocks and resemble charcoal, or those that are like the seeds of barley.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And these are either small or large, and that they heal from these to these parts and downwards, and is one, neither too few nor too many, neither too high nor too low.</end_of_turn
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the buttocks must be treated according to the months of little humidity, from which runs citrine water or a little of salt with continuous color, and according to the color of the wound.</end_of_turn
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the care of that which is inside the wound is that the patient should be given wine to drink and that he should vomit until the wound is healed and the swellings disappear.</end_of_turn
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then lie down and suspend one hand or hold these with your nail, and promptly incline these must be cut off.</end_of_turn
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	However, if the nails are not to be taken out because of the humidity of the air and the softening of these, then take them out with rough or coarse or flaccid wool, and extract them from the tissues with the tweezers, and immediately cut them off.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And promptly care for them with the other treatment until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey defecation, then order the patient to sit on a small cushion, and let him be bathed in the water that is in the wound, and that he defecate willingly when the patient vomits.</end_of_turn
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However, if the wounds are outside the buttocks, the cause of these is slight, and that you take hold of these with your nail, or take hold of them with a bandage, and insert them, and promptly care for them with the water that has been mentioned until they are healed.</end_of_turn
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever orders an incision, let him administer suture in this manner: take a strong thread and put it on a needle and immediately extract the wounds to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle at the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread in the part below the needle, and so longitudinally; and stretch the wound firmly, and immediately tie the thread and extract the needle.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do all this, and leave these for one and do not touch them, so that the excess of the healing runs from this.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And promptly place over the buttocks a compress soaked in olive oil or in cerate; and place that over the wound and order the patient to rest.</end_of_turn
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And promptly remove that which is inside the box; and when it is morning, care for these with ointment or another treatment until they are healed.</end_of_turn
De curacio de fistulas.	Instruction on the care of fistulas.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Neither too great nor too small wounds are caused by excessive acidity or constriction of nature.</end_of_turn
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since these are ancient and do not work in this medicine, when you see that these are pointed at the spinos or on your nail, that they are made wet by humors and that the pus that comes out hinders them from solidifying; and promptly care for these until they are solidified.</end_of_turn
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And leave these wounds at rest for a more violent reason than at first, until they are healed and are not excoriated; and promptly care for these until they are healed.</end_of_turn
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	As for the care of the spirit, this is key.</end_
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You must know that to encourage, is key, and do not be surprised if you notice redness according to the color of the skin resembling the head of a nail, and that is useful in all the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the buttocks, and because of these pains you must support them.</end_of_turn
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And thus it is known that this is the cause of the gout which is in the circuit of the knee, and that it is held by the nails or with an awl, and that it must be eradicated from its root; and for this reason it is cured.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you will, cauterize as it is before mentioned in the head of the foot.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More than a wart is a small, rough, round blister on the surface of the body, and streaks of pus come out on the most of the children.</end_of_turn>
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its cure is to extend and press that, or to cut that out with a needle or the tip of a knife inside the box.</end_of_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you will, cauterize as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.</end_of_turn>
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus it is eradicated both forwards and backwards with the instrument which I have said.</end_of_turn
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More like a flea is a small, foul-smelling or large blister on the surface of the body running in the groin, and when it is touched it appears like a bite of a flea, and it is harmful around the body.</end_of_turn
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its cure is to take a needle of awl or of hook, and be strong, and press that on the flea inside until it contains it around the circumference of the needle of its bristles; and then pull back your hand with the needle inside until it has penetrated the flea, and place that in the groin of the body, and that you evacuate the flea from its root.</end_of_turn
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you will, do that with a needle or with a steel in this way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The tip of the needle should be grasped with dexterity, without perforating, enclosed so that over the thumb the learning of the hand is ablated and the revolution of that.</end_of_turn
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you will, cauterize the flea as it has been said above in the cauterization of the heel.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	As for the instruments that are administered to give comfort.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some ointments are useful for comfort of silver or lead or ivory ground or malleated; and some ointments are useful of those small and great instruments according to those which are administered, for whoever is administered in the care of the little children is small; and of those of whom the buttocks are tough or painful, those comforts are small.</end_of_turn
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of great and little comfort.</end_of_turn
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle in which the bag is tied is wide according to this manner; and let there be a space between that and the bag as often.</end_of_turn
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the limb which is enclosed in the buttock, which is entered behind the thigh, is silent (so it is not opened) more like a lion, behind the heel there are two veins, and on the other side one vein, and the breadth of the vein according to the greatness of the rays is greater; and the greater the ray, the greater the vein.</end_of_turn
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin are placed, and the root of it be a palm.</end_of_turn
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated for by two veins as often as it is rotated; and if the space between the veins is the thickness of a finger.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And thus put into those veins firmly with force of force the thread which is of twelve threads, or about those; and adjust that to that the bag be filled; and when it is placed in it the bag is straight in the head of the comfort between two supports with strong constraint, and cauterize with that which each vein demands: More the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is scaly according to the quantity of the patient’s tolerance; and keep that it is not too cold nor too hot.</end_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And thus the patient is placed lying down on the bed, and the legs are raised up on his chest and place a cushion under them on which already the servants are or a cushion; and anoint the limb with oil or with almond oil or with fennel ointment or with marigold; and then insert that into the buttock with ease, and the minister puts a finger over the bag and expresses that until it is evacuated in the belly all that is in the comfort; and then take away the comfort and the patient takes his legs to the wall.</end_of_turn>
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to be repeated, keep that as much as you can; and if you sleep with that for the whole night, it is better in the morning.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May it be so that even if you criticize him concerning the solution of his illness and his symptoms, the hour you iterate your cautery within him, until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if on the buttocks or the thighs there are wounds or abscesses, then the doctor must be skilled and experienced, like those doctors from whom children learn.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de las plaguas.	Care for the wounds.</end_of_turn>
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said concerning the division of the care of wounds that it is proper to do so freely, and I say the same concerning the care of those who are with me and the medicines according to their compliment.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are varied according to the cause of the wound and the location of the wound.</end_of_turn
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes of wounds are various: by fall of stone, or incision of space or rib, or percussion with a blunt object, or by bite, or by arrow, or like these.</end_of_turn
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The wounds that are on the limbs of the body are also like the wound which falls on the head, or the collar, or the foot, or the belly, or the genitals, or like those of the members.</end_of_turn
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the care of some wounds so that you stop that reasoning and regulation concerning the others.</end_of_turn
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple head wounds, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is caused by the fall of stone or something similar, and if it has already bled so much alone that it is a great wound and you fear that there may be an abscess, then cover the head with a dressing and apply a cephalic plaster as soon as possible; do not delay this. Extract according to that which is necessary of the infection according to the quantity of the virtue of the plaster, if there is no other prohibitive cause of evacuation, especially if the infection that comes out of the wound is little.</end_of_turn>
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the evacuation of the opposite side of the wounded part; guard the patient from repletion and from food and coarse food.</end_of_turn
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Although some cause prohibits it, nevertheless reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.</end_of_turn
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest on the wound, if there is an abscess caused by cautery, soak in oil or in wine in which is stipticated.</end_of_turn
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Although you are sure of the cautery abscess, nevertheless rest on the wound, if it is recent and the air has not moved the powder which I recommend to remove immediately.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already moved that, rest on an emollient dressing until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Although the wound is great or is caused by incision of space and is similar, and its edges are not adjusted for pupils, adjust those with suture as I recommend for their suture.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Although the wound is already exposed from the bone and soft parts, and is not retention but a little support, then puncture that and apply medicine to the wound and restore the limb almost in the place of the codena, and command the patient to abstain from eating coarse food: heads and offal and similar things, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find gangrene in the codena and it does not adhere to the bone, then you puncture everything that can be punctured and drain it, and apply treatment to it.</end_of_turn
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Although in these wounds there may be an artery or vein from which blood flows out of the wound, and which is not closed by medicine, inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not pierced, then puncture it with a lancet, or ligate it; and if necessary, as it causes you to do, do not obey what we have said.</end_of_turn
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is slight; thus if you sprinkle over them this powder, which when solidified will cover them, that will be enough.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take part olive oil, two parts of holy oil, three parts of burnt ochre; mix them all together and grind them, and apply the wound with it, and bind it with good constriction until it sticks to the wound, and coagulate with the oil.</end_of_turn
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And thus strengthen that which is loosened from the dust and read that, and do not loosen it while it is still moist, for it is not prescribed from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And so do it alone with the cautery, when it is not at your present command in the case of wounds and of healing.</end_of_turn>
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And thus do this medicine work in large wounds when you consider that it must be stopped over those and that they must be flexible, and only in recent wounds that have healed, which will not have been altered.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if they have been altered, and especially when it is in summer, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, rather you must take care of those which we have said, because you must place your hand over those edges which are now engorged with pus, or over those seeds of barley which are in water and honey until they have become soft; and take care of those in the other way until they are healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Moreover if it happens to the fractured bone in the foot, and it is small, then you must extract it with the hand.</end_of_turn>
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the care of the fractures of the skull in that which there is poison.</end_of_turn>
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the heel.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Moreover if the wound happens on the heel, there is no difference in treatment between it and the wound of the head when it is simple.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Moreover if the nerve of the heel is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its engineering but that it be avoided treatment of it with that which makes violent stypticitation, like zinc or saffron which is old and resembles them because it does not affect the nerves and opposes that.</end_of_turn
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place your hand over any cause of great heat, for the substance of the nerves is hot and the continuation of them is at the brain, which is the source of all the limbs.</end_of_turn
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it must be treated with medicines that are light, even as in the case of a wound caused by a washcloth in olive oil or not-olive oil, and throw it away when it has been washed with clean water and the other things that make it dirty according to this manner, and heat it up.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	Moreover if the wound is large, then administer sutures, or ligate its edges, and take care of it with powders until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Moreover if the wound is deep or has happened at the lower part of the foot, then perforate that in the area most depressed.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Moreover if in the wound an artery has already been cut and blood flow has been achieved, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary to prevent you from doing it.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Moreover if the spine of the heel or all of them have already been cut, and the veins of the heel have been preserved, then you adjust the edges of the heel with sutures over the heel bone and do not touch that; remove that and reduce that to its natural figure, and strengthen that by stretching it out, and read that for a few days; and take care of that which is inflamed in which there is stypticitation and excitement until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Moreover if the wound has already perforated the bone in price, then pierce that through, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of those that you can; and what is not broken, read that until the wound is healed, and be separate and the discharge of it be alleviated.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle on that powder which has been recommended to you.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	Moreover if there is a fistula in the wound, then take care of that with the water from which the memory will come soon in the head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the heel or of a similar nature when it has happened between the buttocks and is fayta with space or with swelling or with swelling or with swelling or with a lump.</end_of_turn>
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the heel or of the ankle, and sometimes of its depth, consider more if there is any air in the wound than the patient has; the doctor must know that the wound is mortal.</end_of_turn
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not of depth and the wound is recent at the beginning of healing, then you must place your hand over it for the first hour and do not strengthen that because it will not be retained in the depth of it and will return to the head and worsen the patient, but rather wait for a while without touching it until it has healed.</end_of_turn
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the patient does not present with the disease at the present time, then rest in the plague area for a while until the humors subside; and make the patient sleep on the plague so that what is in them is discharged.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	Even if the plague has passed three days or more, and the patient does not have seizures, muscle spasms, or severe abdominal pain, sometimes other good signs appear; therefore, know that the plague is passing away; and then treat with calamus and other cures until the patient is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	Even if recovery is delayed, and the wound has already opened, know that it is finally healing; therefore, treat the fistula accordingly.</end_of_turn>
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the plague is due to an incision of space or cartilage, and is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat with sutures if large, or with powder if small.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Even if inflammation has subsided in the bone, and only the fragments remain, then twist the plague and cover to extract those fragments, if they are separated.</end_of_turn
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, know that the evacuation of the plague makes the extraction easier.</end_of_turn>
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other plagues that occur in other parts of the body, their treatment is the same as that which has been said.</end_of_turn
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the abdominal plagues.</end_of_turn>
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, slight, or moderate.</end_of_turn
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	When there is great swelling of the intestines, the budel or nerves of the intestine have become affected, because their intrusion has ceased and their suture must be more violent and finer.</end_of_turn
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A slight disruption is easily remedied by other means; but if its reduction is more difficult, if you do not hold the intrusion of the intestines in the area as much as possible, it will open and swell because the contents will be difficult to extract.</end_of_turn
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is moderate, because in this one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is in the two preceding cases.</end_of_turn
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And it is known that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common in other plagues of the body.</end_of_turn
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are specific to these other plagues, but they are only specific to the suture of the abdomen.</end_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend that you make any exposure and declaration.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, I say that when the plague is slight and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen with cold air.</end>
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore, when it is like that, you must cover that part with a cloth which you will wet in lukewarm water alone, or that you will grasp with water squinant, and saffron, and pepper, and cloves until the inflammation is resolved.</end
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Many herbs make the water in which it has been steeped useful for stopping bleeding, and it is better than the water alone for resolving the inflammation.</end><end_turn>
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore, when the inflammation is resolved, then you must moisten the intestine with water in which the height and malva leaves have been steeped, because by this means the contents of the intestine will be alleviated with little cause.</end><end_turn
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Even if the contents of the intestine are evacuated in this way, do not neglect this treatment; for a little with this instrument which has the incisions, there will be bloodstains.</end><end_turn>
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is better when it is gentle, when it is appropriate and not excessive or laborious.</end><end_turn>
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, concerning its shape:</end><end_turn><end_turn>
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part is acute, and the other is not acute, and the handle is narrow, and not as wide as a palm, about as wide as a thumb.</end><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, when the plague is amplified and the intestine is outside, know that its reduction must be according to its natural shape, in the proper place, if possible over something, because that is better.</end><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you must place the patient's thighs over the seat two and pause their legs above the seat head; and if it is in the more distant part of the belly, then you must pause their head and their feet above the seat head.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And in the same way, if the disruption is in either of the two parts of the belly, then you must suspend your understanding and your thoughts always in this way so that the part which has the plague is higher than the other
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer it in the great plagues and in the small plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, pause the liquid that you have prepared, and thus make sure that the ministering is between your greatest pains, which has the whole disruption in its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and thus uncover from that to that which may cause the suture to break apart again
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture technique: to grasp the needle or the needle handle according to the quantity of the wound's breadth; and thus leave the tip of the disruption of the ring finger; and tighten the needle once, or twice as much as you do not believe in the two extremities of the coccyx, at the two extremities of the hip bone which is left by the coccyx, until you have penetrated that part; and you have already added two extremities of the coccyx and two extremities of the hip bone, so that there are four orders in total.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And thus tighten it firmly double in the circuit of the needle, and several threads of two parts together, and thus add the two lips and the wound together by adding downwards; and thus leave the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that place, and thus link that one firmly as well as the first needle; and do not stop until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And whether the needles are fine or coarse, because the fine needles do not pierce the flesh too eagerly; and the coarse ones are difficult to penetrate the coccyx, therefore because of this you must make them move in subtility and coarseness
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not make the needle stay in two extremities of the coccyx too long, for so the flesh is not pierced too eagerly and the wound is opened before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suture too much so that the wound is not prohibited from consolidation
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And thus puncture the extremities of the needles so that they do not irritate the patient’s wound because they are asleep; and you will pause over the suture while expanding the powder from every part, which has the extremities of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound has already consolidated
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These kinds of sutures with needles in cold weather are more convenient in the small plagues, because it involves only one or two needles or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is more common: and it is that you administer with the suture the four extremities, of the coccyx and two extremities of the hip bone, at the same time, with one needle in which you are faithful enough to enclose the swelling in subtility and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And thus when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that middle part from which you began, so that the faithful thread retracts slightly so that the pus that has risen from that part is brought down to the wound, so that the suture is as strong as the one that has been made with the cloth which is strong enough.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the middle finger
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture breaks the bones.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture I saw cured a a man who was bitten in the belly by a dog which was placed by a wound in a palm, and it was the disruption of the greatest wound of a palm, and it was extracted from between two palms of the belly and was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and when I had reduced that, after the belly had been outside the wound for xxx hours
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated within fifteen days or around, and it healed; and thus we saw that it was possible to make this kind of suture in this kind of wound.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had said that it would not be healed; and by a miracle, behold, it healed without any remedy, for in that place there was neither any other medicine nor any treatment, but I paused over the wound every two days and applied continuous cold with water of honey until it healed
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I say two kinds of sutures which are proper according to the narration of Paraula
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And that you begin with the suture of the coccyx, and enter the needle from the proximal part to the distal part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	Therefore, when the needle pierces the heel and in that middle lacerates as directed and in length throughout the body, and leaves the tip of the cautery in the place where the needle was introduced; and penetrate the other extremity with the needle from the base to the point at the other extremity of the limb.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	Therefore, when you have made that puncture, then make another perforation further down in that middle extremity of the limb from the base to the point at the other extremity; and leave the tip of the cautery in that place, and penetrate the other extremity from the base to the point at the other extremity of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And thus penetrate also where your previous puncture was made, and with that make the perforation in the cautery at the tip of the limb that is in the part above that which you have pierced.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And thus begin from this middle side and hold that part which is at the tip of the limb that is in the other side, and extract the needle from the heel that you have pierced, and then reduce that in that heel and close the tip of the limb that is in the other side from this tip of the limb; and extract that from the heel which is from their parts.</end_of_turn>
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once more and another, and do this once more, until you have cauterized all that is beyond according to that example.</end_of_turn>
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of stitching is that you cauterize with stitching of tissues where you cauterize the skin, so that you cauterize the cautery of the part of the heel, and that you leave that other cautery until it is completed.</end_of_turn>
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of stitching that we say immediately, which is that of the ladies, and this is in their custom and is recommended, is that you cauterize according to the manner in which many doctors cauterize it, so that you add all parts to their proper part for nature; and place one hand on the other hand and the hand of the limb on the other hand, and that is sufficient according to what you have recommended.</end_of_turn>
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you have left the needle in the limb at your will from the base to the point, and you have made that perforation at the point, and have left two extremities of the cautery; and then rotate the needle and make that perforation from the base to the point in two extremities of the limb.</end_of_turn
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And thus rotate those cushions, and make that perforation in any part from the base to the point in two extremities of the limb above that which are on the side.</end_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than the common lighter suture, and is a suture of which there is precedent.</end_of_turn
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of the ladies.</end_of_turn>
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And I say to you, the belly suture is rectified with two needles, so that you enter with these into any part a thread, and begin with the inward needle of that which you must do, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which you cauterize.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, the hour of stitching it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.</end_of_turn
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More is required of the physician in the case of a wound than in the case of other wounds.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is that when you touch the wound recently with the hand, that the air changes that, and reduces the swelling and closes that and supports that adequately, the hour you stop over that fleshy powder.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, the hour you stop over that cushion that is with you until it makes the flesh hard and breaks the threads, and becomes consolidated limb and limb; and you take care of that just as you would take care of the care of other wounds until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you are not present with the medicines, the hour you stop over that enough, for it begins to swell, wrinkle, and change that two veins that you give, just as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you do not give another medicine in vain when the wounds are simple.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound communicates with an injury to the principal limbs, the hour you cover that that you immerse linen wool in quality olive oil, or in sweet oil, and stop that in the circle of the parts that are between the armpits and leave the bands.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the swollen belly, which causes those threads to break, the hour you crush that with black tape that you have, and especially if the swelling is extended to the belly and is useful to withdraw by penetrating it into the curvature of it.</end_of_turn
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	The greatest pain comes from the large intestine, while that in the small intestines is less severe.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to cure that which is called “gegunu,” because it does not yield to a common remedy like other diseases; and this is because of the great multitude of veins which are in it, and for its great size, and for the subtlety of its structure, and for its proximity to nerves.</end_of_turn>
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	However, if the cause of the disease is known to be a wound, reduce it according to your custom, as you do with other swellings.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	However, if it has already passed through the space and is either green or black, then strengthen your hand firmly over the area that is affected by the wound, in order that the blood flow be restored, for in the wound veins and arteries are found.</end_of_turn>
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And thus cut through what is another cause of the disease, and suspend two extremities of the hand from the part beyond the wound, in order that there be relief from the attraction of the wound towards the wound itself.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the wounds of the intestine when they happen.</end_turn>
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is disruption of the intestine and it is slight, it is possible that it will remain contained within the abdominal cavity, so that you may see that which had been placed flat in the belly by percussion is no longer there, since the disease was overcome and a fistula was formed, and the discharge of its matter and wind.</end_turn
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And thus we shall follow the treatment of these cases even though we do not expect their complete recovery, for we must abstain from the subtleties until the pain has ceased and the area is consolidated.</end_turn
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when the area is consolidated, time to return concerning the pain that caused this accident in the belly; and do not neglect any other disease that exists in your body, and remain in rest, eating and drinking, and approach with oil and move around in your bed.</end_turn
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And indeed some experienced people have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it is necessary to tie it up in this manner: take a piece of large gauze and adjust the two lips of the wound and place a piece of gauze over the mouth of the wound; and when you press over those and stretch your mouth, the head of the wound will be separated, which adheres and is not dissolved.</end_turn
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And thus place another piece of gauze over the first one, and do not stop until you have placed as many pieces of gauze as there are in the whole wound.</end_turn
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And thus reduce the wound and close it with the wound; and leave the remaining heads of the wound inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not do anything to the pain.</end_turn
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is bound firmly by a subtle thread which is the cause of the beastly tumor of the intestine; for it is more pointed; take hold of the extremity of these threads of the intestine, and do not tear it away, and bind the extremity of it to the body of the wound, covering it with cloth, and bind that thread with needles and close the wound.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of stitching with gauze is nothing other than a way of hope and expectation.</end_turn>
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	However, if the wound is large and wide, mostly if it is in one of the small intestines, it is not possible to cure it except by subtlety, and not to cure it completely.</end_turn
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Care for worms and fistula.</end_turn>
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all wounds and abscesses, when they grow old and become ancient, become ulcers, and are not consolidated and always have their arm broken and are not separated, the hour that in any member they are, is universally called fistula and is called that which bursts.</end_turn
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula in truth is a foul-smelling, hard, white ulcer, without pain, with which the belly is swollen like a pregnant woman; and for this reason it is called a wound of merit.</end_turn
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in such soft humors that it breaks; and when the humidity is removed, it is separated in a few hours.</end_turn
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And many plants have this humidity, which is sticky, little, great, and subtle.</end_turn
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division that when I speak of wounds, that all ulcers that are not healed or that are not in their pure state, are not other than for one of these causes: either for the scarcity of healing in the body; or for malice of them; or because between them and the lips there is hard flesh which prevents the birth of flesh; or because it is sticky mucus; or because it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in the treatment of them; or when corruption occurs in the region, and is pestilence; or because of the property of the region itself as it happens sometimes in Zaragoza, where digestion of diseases is difficult and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature.</end_turn
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	The causes have been shown, their symptoms and their treatment are in the division of medicine.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so I shall tell you the treatment for fistula, which is useful by means of surgery with the hand
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; which are fistulas that arise from veins and great arteries, or nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or the kidneys, or any of the vertebrae, or any of the compound joints because of such composition as that of the hand and foot; and of these it is necessary to have proximity to the main limb and similarity.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that fistula which is in this manner is one of the diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and requires work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is any fistula of the depth that does not reach these places that I have said, and you hope and trust in the cure of them, and you wish to learn of them, when you attempt to remove them or burn them, and if the fistula goes according to the rule, ask about that from me.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Or if the fistula is crooked, then investigate that which is attempted to do by the subtle hand, for the weight of the body is alleviated and curved should overcome the crookedness.</start_of_turn>
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is not accompanied by violent movements, it is not possible for you to know of it by attempting it.</start_of_turn
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore glorify the works for their works, for the moisture for which you glorify them goes from the other works and comes out from them.</start_of_turn
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And so inquire diligently, according to what manner you are able to know if here is something of nerves or bones, and is the curvature of the fistula long or short, or is it a fistula to which there is associated some movement of the organs and this is over what all of your strength, your prudence, your illness, and the invention of the pain consists, because of your compression with your hand over the area, and similarity of the signs and the accidental causes to the apostema.</start_of_turn
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all of those causes at rest, then go to the treatment with confidence: and that is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close to the surface or in the limb, long from the joint, or of the nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of any of the places that I have mentioned to you.</start_of_turn
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula according to what is said in the narration of it, and stay until what is in that filtration and corruption of flesh is gone, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of blood vessels and similarity, and cure that which enters until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Or if the fistula is of great depth, and is according to the rule, then cover that in the preparation as much as your ability allows, and almost remove all of your corrupted flesh; and give warm compresses with acute medicines, and introduce them into the curvature of the fistula, which you have grasped with the hand.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do thus with whatever herbs you introduce until the acute medicine has eaten away everything that is rotten in the curvature of the fistula from corruption.</start_of_turn
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that which you have scorched which produces healthy flesh until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Or if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.</start_of_turn
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Or if the cause of the fistula is bone and is due to your certificate that, stay dry until you have certified that, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.</start_of_turn
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Or if it is to you discovered and is in it any corruption and blackness, then you should remove that until the corruption is gone; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	Or if it is not healed and you have reached your limit as regards the eradication of the corruption; then you know that you have not reached the root of the corruption; and then you discover about it again more diligently and cautiously make the reason for it and the modification of it with the greatest strength of your mind, and then restore that.</start_of_turn
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, well; and if not, you know that that corruption is in the profound depth of the body, which has not been overcome, and then you will know that in that you will not achieve anything except to cover it up.</start_of_turn
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	Or if the corruption is small, or you are able to extract it, then you extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for that.</start_of_turn
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If bones are moved, it is exceptionally necessary to extract all of them, and of those do not leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Despite any adversity caused by humors, and at the outset there is no fear or error, it is necessary to cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present here, and to break the bones
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Despite the lack of preparation of the bones at your hand, when you pause over the wound what you cause to soften the wound that remains around those bones and flesh, and you leave that inside until what surrounds those bones of flesh and ligaments is evacuated, and keep the wound from solidifying, and constrict the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you are afraid, pause over the limb immersed in boiled broth with olive oil, or the limb immersed in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the aforementioned unguents, because when they are softened those ligaments will be separated from the wound, and the bones will be relieved of the traction.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Despite a large bone such as the bone of the thigh or the bone of the hip or resembling those, and what is corrupted of them is only the surface, it is necessary to cauterize only that part behind the wound only after that black spot and corruption have been removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Despite the great corruption, if the marrow of the bone has already been corrupted, it is necessary to close that and the other hole that has been made to reach the corruption, and the pain will be cured when the corruption has solidified
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you call a man in his household who can stay beside you and watch over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	For a young man who is about xxx years of age, who has suffered pain in his knee, and from whose parts that is maudlin most of all is about the matter of the body that has entered the knee until the matter has reached the knee, and is a matter of great swelling, and not of external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so it is extended the time for the error of the doctors until the swelling subsides, and I take away the matter that is moved, and their cure is to be delayed until the wound is healed, and they make incisions in various places from which all the pain and the humors of the body are evacuated.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so the multitudin of doctors will last for two years, and I am not in that art, until I am called
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the wound of the limb and the matter that runs from there from those orifices for a great distance; and already the color of that man was pale and yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so I introduced the hook into one of those orifices and reached the hook to the bone
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And I saw that they had all come out from all parts of the wound
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so I closed my eyes and cauterized one of those orifices until I saw a piece of the bone break, and I cauterized that corruption, which was already black and rotten; and already a part of the wound had become corrupted before it had penetrated into the marrow
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And thus I accomplished what was said to me and prepared from the bone that had been uncovered
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I said that I was not in the bone but that corruption which I had evacuated and treated, and I had already drained it
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And so I paused the restoration of the wound with conservative medicine for a long time, and it is not solidified
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I repeated the process and discovered again about the bone as before, and I continued to see corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I said that to me appeared from that corruption, and I performed the surgery to make the cure and restoration, and it is not restored
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so I discovered the other ulcer and I did not cease to make small incisions in the bone little by little until I had perforated the restoration of the limb, and it is not restored until I had extracted it from the marrow, and I restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of the limb and the incision of the limb, but for the provision of the freulein of the limb and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, which is in all hours excessive evacuation without any great harm.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus is healing throughout, and nothing is like a hard bone; and it is good to have the use of the limb back in the whole body; and it is conserved in its use and does not make it contrary to walking or sleeping in any cause
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May be he is prominent in limb of the body already has drawn, that is to say, you take ligament and stretch that at the extremity of that prominence, and command that he extend that at his will; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then lay that on the bone that is left of the prominence, and extend the limb so that the bone reaches the parts below, and uncover the bone over the place where you wish to close, that the suture does not burn the bone.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause firmly or tightly leave the bone in its place, because when you do that the suture will not be prohibited the cutting that does not split the corrupted bone.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover that the suture is made over the corrupted area little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and force the suture there another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, advance one part continuously with the other, and the corruption is in the middle of the limb or in part of it, when you uncover the bone from all parts; then immediately pause firmly, and immediately suture that which was the first part where the corruption was, until the suture of the other part is completed
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suture be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, prick that corrupted joint, and suture the bones that are continued from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but it is cunning.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is not easy; however, cover that you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and open that, and tell me how you wish to manage it, and in whatever way is possible for you, and in case it is rectified for you, when it does not make your vein or nerve worse
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Therefore know what is incisions and what saws to incision these bones are not always according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the greatness of those, and the fineness and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and rarity of those; for that reason you must prepare for every kind of operation the appropriate instrument for that operation
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Therefore know that this operation means for you about the kind of instrument from which you will approve; when indeed it is great study and long and with knowledge of the methods of this art, and testimony of the methods of diseases, that the hour you already have for your purpose what is convenient for them from all the ailments of the disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will find as simple as those with which you will proceed at your prohibition which you will experience about the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of suture:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another suture
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another suture
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of great another suture
Forma de ray:	Needle form
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	And the head of this needle according to the form of a star, and the points of it are according to the form of the points of the needle of the staple.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not convene to put together the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or when the large mouth is wide open
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Larger size of the knife than the others
Forma de razori menor:	Smaller size of the knife
Forma de razori lat:	Broad blade of the knife
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another suture properly made: it is made in an arc with its point downward and the thickness of its wire, and its limb is of boys with its point downward.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a knife in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle knife
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another knife with a curved extremity
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small rasp like a tentacle
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an instrument with which the bones are incisions
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incision instrument
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision; this is like a needle, and the extremity of it is like a knife, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Formation of rays that converge in proportion to those that are pierced by bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The limb is triangular and acute-angled at the extremity.</end_of_turn>
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, resembling all the causes we have mentioned of razors and scissors and knives.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the incision of the limb and the cutting of the bones.</end_of_turn>
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The limbs are supported either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or as you have treated that corruption for healing with those medicines and the healing does not relieve it, or sometimes the corruption goes away by itself from the limb without having pierced it with any cause, when you must suspect that corruption within that limb where the pain has ceased, for that the pain escapes by that which is more harmful to the limb.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it befalls, is that the limb is black within that it is healed than when the fire has already consumed it, or that it becomes pale near the blackness as soon as the black has gone out of that limb that surrounds it and engulfs all the body; and therefore I advise you to desist from the incision of that.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And in the same way if the cause of the corruption is a percussion of some venomous causes such as the scorpion of the sea or the fox or the viper and the like.</end_of_turn
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you must pierce the finger and do not give space for the corruption to go inside the hand.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And in the same way if you reach the hand, then you must pierce that from the root of the bone, and do not give space for the corruption to go inside until it has consumed the bone of the forearm.</end_of_turn
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you do not know which one, then you must pierce the limb within the crease at the joint.</end_of_turn
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another one passes, the corruption, and sometimes the limb itself goes away, then in that case death of the disease is the best; and to administer another cause after another in order to cure is in quantity of virtue.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And in the same way if the corruption comes from the foot when it comes to the heel, then you must pierce that within one of the nails.</end_of_turn
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it is on the sole of the foot, then you must pierce the whole foot.</end_of_turn>
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Maybe if it is inside the nail, then you must pierce the nail at the joint of the nail.</end_of_turn
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the nail, then in that case there is no other remedy but dismissal, and to let the disease take its course.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The manner of piercing the limb or cutting it is that you grasp the ligament behind which you wish to pierce, and grasp another ligament over the area; and extend one minister over the parts beyond, and extend another minister over these; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without stretching too much the skin until the whole flesh is discovered; and then pierce or cut.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that there be no movement of the limb from all parts so that it does not touch the area; and that the disease receive a wound adjusted and aftercare of cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Maybe if an ointment of salvation comes when working, then you cauterize the area superficially, or stop them for some powders that tighten the salvation; and then you return to your medicine until it is complete.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And keep the affected limb fixed with a ligament as desired, and care for it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend to you that you should send a man to the sick foot of this man, this method that I and you recommend, which is that which is acrid to him like the black in the sick foot is to him like fire to combustion.</end_of_turn
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption is acrid at first in the heel before it affects the whole foot.</end_of_turn
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man should prepare himself for himself more than when he receives the cure for the limb with the utmost diligence of him that he suffer from pain and adversity, and he pierce that foot within the joint, and fire heals.</end_of_turn
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time acrid to him that same medicine in the thumb of the hand indicates.</end_of_turn
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I saw that it was necessary for me to pierce that superfluity that was placed over the hand of the medicines, to approach the movement of the body; and the superfluity did not rebound and began to go away from the thumb as soon as it began on the hand.</end_of_turn
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	The patient's hand should be grasped firmly, and I do not wish to perform anything further that could worsen the condition, for I fear that the consequence of such action may be death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When he awakens, let him be returned to his place and I will depart, having learned that the said man had prepared and grasped his hand entirely, and he is well.</end_of_turn>
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not narrated this story except to say that it is helpful concerning what has fallen out of this ailment, and that its significance is great and significant in this matter.</end_of_turn>
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Take care of the bowels and the quality of the enema as with the physicians.</end_of_turn>
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a fleshy limb, the space of the abscess is prolonged until collection of pus has formed, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it. The limb should be kept still as if it were a vessel, and the surrounding tissue should be supported with fine silk or wool, without causing damage to bones, nerves or ligaments. This is called an incision, and is not named fistula.</end_of_turn
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until corruption spreads to some limb, then it is called fistula and we do not name it.</end_of_turn
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The care for it is that we grasp that corden entirely as if it were twisted, and more so when it is subtle and is useful as silk, and comfort that it does not adhere to the area for its corruption.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the corden will adhere and that the corruption will not cause further consequence, and if there is swelling in the corden, then you should treat it with an enema.</end_of_turn
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the pain, for if it is great, and the limb stinks of fetor, then an Egyptian medicinal oil is to be instilled which is made from olive oil and vinegar and gum resin, taking parts of each equal, and they are placed in a vessel and covered over the fire until the medicinal oil has become soft and reached the consistency of honey.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and instill it into the limb, strengthen the opening of the limb, and leave the medicine in it for the space of two hours.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And remove that when it is finished; and do this for several days until the limb is healed and the pain is gone.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes vinegar is instilled with water of ashes, when this medicine is not at hand; take the ashes of vitriol, put them on water; and do so until you believe that the limb is healed.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then instill an enema of olive oil and honey and vinegar which has been triturated with lead, and an enema of vinegar and honey which has been mixed together, for the property of honey is to soften and cleanse, and the vinegar makes the limb adhere, and especially when there is excess of stickiness and dryness.</end_of_turn
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and you are confident that the limb is healed, then instill an enema of water which makes the flesh swell in it.</end_of_turn>
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take from vinegar some camphor and dissolve that in warmed oil; or that you instill some medicines which have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of medicines.</end_of_turn
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the limb is narrow through which the canula of the enema has not been received, then you should gradually widen it, and rest it in warm water wrapped in Egyptian or basil ointment until it is enlarged.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the opening is wide, you should sew together its edges and leave them for the quantity of time that is necessary for the enema to be absorbed.</end_of_turn
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the limb which has the pain is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area in the bottom of the limb which is in it, for the limb will be forced to go down when the limb is straightened, since when the limb is bent in the bend of the limb the flesh will be pressed against it.</end_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the limb outside of the bone according to your wish, then you must make an incision that will prepare the limb according to the way in which you would do for a limb which is voluntarily bent according to your will, and that no cause should remain which would prevent the limb from being straightened.</end_of_turn
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are to be placed on the limb as you consider convenient until you wish to extend those over the outside of the limb.</end_of_turn
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E le drap sia de tal grande quantità come fa la comunicazione di tutto il corpo; e aprop incidese am le forfexi nel tribolo dell'orificio del corpo un trauco più ampio di poco dell'orificio del corpo; e aprop estende altro marc di li degli inguentz leoni secondo la quantità del trauco, e posa le sopra quello per posizione longitudinale dell'orificio del corpo per che sia allegato l'eysiment del braco e non ostacoli il marc grande solo a poco più di due giorni di distanza.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And so whoever is over the parts of the body which remain there for a whole hour, in order that they do not escape which is placed in them of the hand.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know that it escapes from them of the hand is neither hot nor cold, or is digested, or is not digested
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you must consider the place of that body, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in it apostematus.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is spilled over the parts of the body has already adhered, or if appropriate adherence, then remove the bandage or dressing the third day, and when you remove the dressing, change the dressing for another and renew it.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And so if at the body is almost free from the subtle virus, then do not despair of the adherence of it, because its healing is appropriate, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh is delayed in the days of the plague, and in those there is benefit from its opposite
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if at the body almost a few days has passed and the hand is still undigested, then you know that the body does not adhere; and if the adherence of the body is delayed and this is the prolonged cause, then you must adjust in excision of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry just as if they were dry today even if they were added excessively.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the more that follows concerning which it is cured, is that you take of dry finicon and dissolve it in olive oil, and let it go over it like an ointment of the substance of vinegar, and then soften that with oil, and use of that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And so it seems in that action, when not to the hand, dry finicon, more than when it is cooked until it is whole, use of that; or that you take mirra and aloes and incense, grind all of them and powder them over the honey when it is cold, and pour liquid over the bandage and strengthen that over the body; and pour liquid over the honey which you have cooked until it is whole, and powder it over the bandage and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And many other herbs are administered with it according to long tradition and the reason of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and barley flour and centaury, and use of those simples or adjusted, grind them and crush them and powder them over the honey which I have recommended; and use of that
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the body is prolonged, and it is not healing for this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the head of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other members durable or to the ligaments; then you must treat it with fistular care, as it is said.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of care of carbuncles and nails attracted and incision of the digit added and section.</start_of_turn>
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Carbuncles are apostemata which do not leave the nail of the finger of the hand or foot out of the palm of the hand or foot, and which, when prolonged, are less valued in their care, or are apostemata of apostemata caused by cautery, or are corrupted, and discharge blood until it consumes the root of the nail, and when it consumes all of that, and when it has reached the bone, it emits an offensive odor, and the limb is fainter, and the color of it is fainter.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore when you have that which we have said in the division and you do not confirm your treatment, then know that you must insert all the force that is able to break the root of the nail and immediately cauterize the wound immediately with liquid, because the burn is not useful in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is soft and the nail is sound, and the humors of the nail have already penetrated the flesh to the bones, and are beginning to burst and swell, then know that you must leave the edge of the nail which is biting the flesh alone, and prick that with your finger and pierce that flesh with ease, and pour liquid over that which remains of the flesh of the medicines which are corrosive until it is all absorbed; and immediately care for that which remains of the flesh until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then know that you must extract the bone and remove it, for no time is it useful that it be corrupted in it.</start_of_turn>
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If sometimes corruption and decay spread in the toe, then you insert that on one of the nails as is foreseen in the indication, and then care for that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail should break due to percussion or cutting, and if there is pain in the nail, then at the beginning of the treatment you must apply some unguents to the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp knife in a transverse cut from front to back, and take care that the cut does not reach the pulp that is left under the nail, for this would cause increased pain, and if the nail is too deeply affected, it will cause swelling in the area. And care for that area where the pain persists.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	The nail being treated is that of a man of ordinary stature, strong in the flesh, strong in the bones, or strong in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	These nails are born in the space between the joints, or the birth of the nails in the bones of the toe
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The nail that is born in the bones of the toe is not bad, but the one that is born in the joints is more painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those nails that are fleshy, the cut is slight, and you must insert that which must be the cause of its root under the skin at the side.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of those that are born in the space between the joints, the cure is difficult; therefore take care of the separation of the nails from each other
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the toe you must remove the nails, then at the beginning of the treatment you must cut the root of the nails to the bone, and then scrape with one of those saws that are convenient to you, and care for that until it is healed
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	If consolidation occurs in the toe between the soft parts or for the birth of the fetus, or for consolidation of pus or for burning of fire, or for stiffness, then you must take care that this consolidation disappears before the nails return to their natural shape
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And so you must leave between the layers of hair a smear of olive oil so that they are not fixed together, and separate between them, or put between them a layer of thin lead until it is consolidated as much as you think necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly if consolidation occurs in the bones of the toe with the palm, then you must dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and convenient to the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the beginning of vice, so are varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varices, and these are veins that are wrapped around thick veins filled with black bile that flow in the limbs of the body, and their greatest progress is in the veins of the wanderers, the laborers, and the sailors.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore you must administer purgatives of the body of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then draw blood from the basilica vein of the patient
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	There are two methods for treating them: one is to prick and let black bile leak out, and the other is to elevate the vein and extract all of its blood.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of them is like this: with the first finger you must embrace the limb at the beginning with cold water until the black bile is resolved, which is useful for the limb, and then tighten the limb of the patient at the part furthest from the navel with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or in two or three in a wide section, and then elevate the black bile to the navel with the thumb of the hand furthest from the limb, and withdraw it in juice, until the quantity that you want has been withdrawn, and the one that is left will restore the virtue of the limb.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And so you must do the same, and order them to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment with flebotomy when the veins are engorged and until the patient is relieved of the pain
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	However, the elevation of them is like this: you must raise the limb of the patient, if there is movement in it, and then put it in water and embrace the limb with cold water until it turns pale and the veins become relaxed; or that you do it with exercise, if water is not available, until the limb is swollen
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And so dry the cord in the root of the vein by cutting in the middle or at the end of it must remove the nail, or in the bottom must cut it off.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And so open the cord with scissors and remove the vein throughout until you feel it, and you must take notice that sometimes that request declines to blacken
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore when you avoid it and the cord becomes white like silk, you must know that it is a cord
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And thus you must put your hand over that which lies beneath your elbow, so that it is raised up and away from the armpit, and suspend that which is once again below the elbow.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And thus you must cut another section alongside that section, and then stretch that section for three fingers, and then extract the armpit from under the vein until it appears.</end_of_turn>
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And thus you must elevate that and pierce that in the lower section beside it, and then extract that and elevate that until it is level with the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.</end_of_turn>
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And thus when you have extracted that from the section that is lower or higher than all the sections, until all is level; then pierce that.</end_of_turn>
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey my advice to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with a strong double hook and grasp that and extract it, or insert your hand under that and rotate your hand over everything until it is bound.</end_of_turn>
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And take care that it is not pierced; for if it is broken, it is difficult to elevate that limb and it is harmful to the patient for that night.</end_of_turn>
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when everything is outside, pause over the area of the wound and cover it with soaked wool immersed in vinegar and olive oil, and oil that is not greasy, and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having pain at the parts which are wrapped around, and it is not in accordance with the rule as we have said, then you must cover your wound over all the parts where there is pain and the parts which are wrapped around, and then suspend that which is inside until you elevate that whole.</end_of_turn
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And take care that your incision does not pierce the vein and that you do not irritate that, for it is difficult to elevate that limb; and use your prudence in that.</end_of_turn
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the wound when the vein is dry.</end_turn
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a ruptured vein.</end_turn
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not acute like nails nor is it of sudden extremity for so that it does not pierce the vein; and it has great flexibility like a lion, for if it were slight, it would pierce the vein by its slightness; because of that it is necessary for it to have great thickness as we have said.</end_of_turn
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the vein of the thigh.</end_turn
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the swamps in low-lying lands as well as in Arabia Major and the Indian lands that are dry and arid with little vegetation and in which there is no tree or shrub.</end_turn
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also engendered in other parts of the body in other places.</end_turn
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the origin of it is putrefaction which leaves the armpit like that in which the venom of serpents and worms and beetles and worms is engendered between the armpit and the flesh.</end_turn
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the approach of the coming of this is that this vein happens in the limb with violent inflammation; and the place is swollen; and the vein begins to burst from that place where the swelling seems to be like a wound from a plant.</end_turn
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see the limb, then cover that with a plum whose weight is equal to two drachs. Enter into two drachs, and notice that and leave the plum suspended from the limb.</end_of_turn>
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as there are causes to the parts outside, you must cover that with lead and neglect that.</end_turn
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the limb is not prolonged, then you must pierce a part of it and bandage the remaining; and do not pierce that which is from outside and has come out, for if you pierce that it is contracted and enters the flesh and causes inflammation and swelling in the place and ulceration.</end_turn
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that you must treat it gently and extract it little by little, until it is outside the back of the limb and does not stay in the limb any longer for any cause.</end_turn
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein is seen in some men who is of its length of five palms and a thumb and I have already known of one that was xx palms long.</end_turn
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is pierced at the time of its treatment, then you must insert the needle into the root of the limb and pierce that which is along the limb of the body, until it is evacuated all that is in the matter, and administer putrefying matter to the place for several days with medicines; and care for that for the healing of ulcers.</end_turn
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	The veins in the ankles become swollen, especially when they are swollen in the foot or ankle joint, and cause great pain, which is why it is called gout.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, take care of that as we said before and as we have mentioned previously.</end_of_turn>
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section above, worms are generated under the skin and it is called bovine fever.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in every land bovine fever because it causes worms to appear in the blood of cows and is very harmful to them. It causes swelling and pain throughout the body, and it appears in the sense that it causes damage to the limbs until it breaks the bone and comes out.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its cause is the putrefaction of some humors as well as by the bites of worms and serpents, and by the presence of worms and lice in the belly.</end_of_turn
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared for the malice of these things, for when it comes to the head and is elevated, it causes great pain. It breaks through the skull and destroys the brain, and this is what causes the swelling.</end_of_turn>
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when you want to cure this and remove it, you must do so with great care and attention to the patient's condition. You must hold the limb firmly in place with your hands and prevent it from moving, and then dry the area around it and extract the foreign body.</end_of_turn
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is pressing on the bone and you do not remove it, then hold the cautery pointed over the area until it stops moving. The greatest cause of fear is the corruption of the bone, as we have mentioned.</end_of_turn
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	In the same way, if sometimes this thing reaches the head near the brain, then grasp the nail firmly with great strength, and then dry the area around it and extract the foreign body. And let the patient be treated with medications that evacuate harmful putrid humors, and keep him away from foods that cause putrefaction.</end_of_turn
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Therefore, take care of that as we said before and as we have mentioned previously.</end_of_turn
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and the pain is what is seen in all the limbs, and it is usually transferred from limb to limb.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And indeed, I have already seen that which I told you before.</end>
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I saw that her arms were swollen and that there was a small swelling in the funis vein of the arm. And when I left for an hour, I saw that the swelling had gone down as much as it had increased at first, even though it seemed like silver when it ran from place to place.</end_of_turn
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I went away from the pain of that limb and rested on the muscle, and I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I went to the other limb until I reached the other arm.</end_of_turn>
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommended to him that he should rotate his limbs all over his body as I saw; and I was amazed at the transformation of things and at the speed of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen before that thing in my travels following that manner, but I have seen that many others have found pain in being transformed from limb to limb.</end_of_turn
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	However, I have not seen that in the limbs like that woman.</end_of_turn
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is anything but because the woman was old, who had dry bones and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is that sudden movement that causes the transformation.</end_of_turn
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this retrograde reasoning in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with veins hidden under the skin.</end_of_turn
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure this, and the patient feels that pain, do not rely on your eyes alone like we have said. Rather, grasp that limb firmly and leave it pleasantly surprised and dry until that violent movement has subsided, and cauterize the area.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	However, if you do not see it often in the limbs, when you cure it you will see that it is an expulsion of the body and that it eliminates the violent movement, and you will praise those pills that are beneficial and those that are of serape and similar.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.</end_of_turn
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to their species and according to the locations of the body in which they are found, because their diversity is that some have large heads, others have small heads, and some have concave, solid, or flexible heads.</end_of_turn
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside. More so if the splinter is in the heart, for then it is in the left breast and cannot be extracted without causing great harm; and you must know that the movement of the splinter is similar to that of a wound, and is like that of the black death, and if there is any coldness of the limbs, and swelling, and oppression; therefore you must know that death is imminent.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside. More so if the splinter is in the heart, for then it is in the left breast and cannot be extracted without causing great harm; and you must know that the movement of the splinter is similar to that of a wound, and is like that of the black death, and if there is any coldness of the limbs, and swelling, and oppression; therefore you must know that death is imminent. And the signs when the lung has been struck by the splinter are like those of the sacred sponge of the plague, and the blood vessels are so close to bursting, and the color of the disease is changed, and great breath is exhaled, and there is a request for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside. More so if the splinter is in the heart, for then it is in the left breast and cannot be extracted without causing great harm; and you must know that the movement of the splinter is similar to that of a wound, and is like that of the black death, and if there is any coldness of the limbs, and swelling, and oppression; therefore you must know that death is imminent. And if the splinter strikes the membrane in the foot, and the pain is great in the small bones, then it is very useful to cause great pain and suspicion, and not to touch any of the muscles
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside. More so if the splinter is in the heart, for then it is in the left breast and cannot be extracted without causing great harm; and you must know that the movement of the splinter is similar to that of a wound, and is like that of the black death, and if there is any coldness of the limbs, and swelling, and oppression; therefore you must know that death is imminent. And if the splinter strikes the stomach, then there is great vomiting of the ongoing plague along with any indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside. More so if the splinter is in the heart, for then it is in the left breast and cannot be extracted without causing great harm; and you must know that the movement of the splinter is similar to that of a wound, and is like that of the black death, and if there is any coldness of the limbs, and swelling, and oppression; therefore you must know that death is imminent. And if the splinter strikes the belly and is embedded, there is any wound of the plague, or the cloth, or bowel that is broken, and there is no hope for the treatment or extraction of the splinter.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside. More so if the splinter is in the heart, for then it is in the left breast and cannot be extracted without causing great harm; and you must know that the movement of the splinter is similar to that of a wound, and is like that of the black death, and if there is any coldness of the limbs, and swelling, and oppression; therefore you must know that death is imminent. And if the splinter strikes the bladder and is expelled with urine, and progresses to any other cause outside, and there is great pain over the disease, then you must know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And thus, when the foot or any other limb is affected, the cause is either that the principal humors of the body, such as the blood, heart, spleen, lungs, bowels, bladder, and kidneys, are affected in some way, or that there is an inflammation of these members. Therefore, when any of these humors appears at the surface of the body, it is called gout. And thus, if this sign appears to you, then you must abstain from treatment and extraction of the splinter if it is not outside. More so if the splinter is in the heart, for then it is in the left breast and cannot be extracted without causing great harm; and you must know that the movement of the splinter is similar to that of a wound, and is like that of the black death, and if there is any coldness of the limbs, and swelling, and oppression; therefore you must know that death is imminent. And concerning the other members as well, such as the face, neck, shoulder, arms and legs, chest and back, spine and pelvis, these are saved according to the greatest capacity when the splinter does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous splinter.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	E eu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifique per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in a certain man who was struck by an arrow in the eye of his nose, and I extracted that from the other side, I left the gray matter of the eye, and he is healthy, and it does not hurt him in his eye at night.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the gray of his eyebrow, I left the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be retrieved until a little piece of it adhered to the eyebrow, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no barbs
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And thus is the Jew, and he does not suffer from the wound in his eyebrow at all
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who was struck in the groin, and it was an Arabian arrow, and there are barbs on it; and when I saw that it was submerged in the groin of the patient, I took hold of it with my hand, and I extracted it, and the Christian is healthy
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in the lower belly, and I thought he would surely die from it; and therefore, since he had passed xxx days and had not recovered from anything of his ailments, I pierced the arrow and extracted it, and he is healthy, and he does not suffer from any wound.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man who was struck by an arrow in both of his eyes, and consolidation of the swelling was made over them; and when I had been there for seven years, I saw the arrow at the root of the swelling.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who was struck by an arrow in the lower belly, and the swelling was consolidated without her knowledge, and she has not suffered from any of her natural operations since then
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face, and the swelling was consolidated and the arrow was broken, without any pain, and he remained like that for a long time.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who was struck in the middle of his nose, and it had already begun to decline from the wound, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him when the arrow had been there for three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And when I arrived I saw that the swelling from the arrow was not severe; and when I asked about the cause of the pain, he did not feel any pain; however, he still felt the tip of the arrow that had been left behind, and I hoped that that was the cause of the pain
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the area with an astringent and digestive plaster, confident that the swelling would disappear because of the presence of the arrow, which would dry up over that area.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident at the site of the arrow. I continued to apply the plaster for several days, and there was no further pain; the swelling had subsided and the patient no longer felt the pain of the extraction for several days after the arrow had been removed from his nose.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I left the acute corrosive dressing for several days until I had seen enough; and when I had examined it, I found the tip of the arrow adhering to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And I adjusted the dressing for the wound for that medicine until I saw the tip of the arrow, and I left it like that for a while.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the swelling had subsided, I thought it would be possible to remove the forceps, and I bound it up again, and did not notice anything; however, I did not cease to work, but I continued to examine and manipulate the area in various ways, until one day I was able to remove the arrow without causing any further pain, according to the fashion of those in power at the end of the chapter, and I restored the wound
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And many doctors believe that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I restored that and the swelling is consolidated, and the patient is completely healed, and I do not recall any subsequent illness in him
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting arrows, for you should pause and reflect on what I have not said, because the causes of these ailments and the definitions of these matters are not comprehended in this narrative or in general
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And wise artists compare themselves to little with the pauc; and in what is present they are absent; and they find new operations and new instruments which must descend from the causes of the disease when they arise
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore I say that the sagittae are not outside the members in which they are placed, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they intersect; or contrariwise to the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is placed in the place where it enters, or is a sagitta proceeding from the flesh, is shot and expelled.</end_of_turn>
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey this time when it is necessary, the hour commands that you leave it lying for a few days until the surrounding flesh has recovered, and that the traction of the parts and their escape be alleviated.</end_of_turn>
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And in the same way if it is placed in bones and you do not obey this time, the hour commands you to leave it lying for a few days and repeat that traction and movement in every day, and it will be expelled.</end_of_turn
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey this time immediately, the hour commands that you perforate in the circuit of the sagitta in that bone throughout its extent until the part is stretched out by the sagitta, and then extract that.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the sagitta is placed in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the disease at that time along with these accidents that I have said, the hour forbids the extraction of the sagitta and leaves it lying until it is equal to several days; for if the sagitta persists in the skull, the hour does not command that it be prolonged.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the sagitta is not placed but only in the marrow of the bone and does not enter the skull, and remains in the disease for several days, and no other accidents occur with it, the hour commands that you endeavor to pull out the sagitta and its traction.</end_of_turn
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	May be if it is not placed and you do not obey this extraction, the hour commands that you administer supports in the circuit of the sagitta as we have recommended, and that you take care of the part until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May be if the sagitta is already hidden in the part of the body and is hidden from feeling, the hour commands you to inquire about it, and if you feel it, the hour pulls that which is convenient for the traction of it.</end_of_turn
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you are unable to do this because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the period, and here neither bone nor nerve nor vein is concerned, the hour commands you to wait for the plague to be amplified so that the sagitta may be extracted.</end_of_turn
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you are in doubt about these things which are prolonged, the hour commands you to break open the flesh in which it is placed throughout its extent with all the skill you can muster; and consult about this, if you are unable to effect the evacuation of the flesh from the fracture of the bones and twisting of those until you obey.</end_of_turn
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you attempt the extraction of the sagitta in any place, the hour commands you to use with torque your hand and forceps at all times until you have accomplished that; and take care that there is no fracture of the sagitta and that it is easily pulled out and that the extraction is successful.</end_of_turn
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you are unable to do this of your hour, the hour commands you to leave it lying for several days until the parts which are in the circuit of it have recovered, and then repeat that which the hour has recommended as being alleviated.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May be if you do contrary to the flow of custom, the hour commands you to administer what we have said of care in the head.</end_of_turn
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your prudence in the incision of a vein or a nerve, or a string, and administer your skill in every way possible for the evacuation of the sagitta; and do this with facility, tranquility, speed and calmness as I have said and as you have recommended.</end_of_turn
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore you must pull out the sagitta so that the disease is according to the figure according to which you must cure the case of the sagitta in it, for this is more beneficial.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May be if this is not possible for you, the hour commands you to administer what is possible for you according to the figures.</end_of_turn
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May be the sagittas which are expelled from the other side, or which have already proceeded from one part to another, or cause stiffness of the transmission of the sagitta by feeling of the part which is lower than the proximate; in this case you must desist from this; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and then pull that out, for it is easily pulled out.</end_of_turn
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	May be if it is retained in the bone, the hour commands you to twist the flesh according to the contrary until the sagitta is pressed into the bone, and expand it, and then extract that.</end_of_turn
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave her for a few days, and then repeat the procedure until it disappears.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the swelling persists at the tip of the toe, then you must pierce it with the cautery.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Even if the swelling has receded and you wish to administer a pulse, then you must enter with your hand and, if necessary, twist to bring the swelling close to the tip of the toe, and then pierce it.</end_of_turn
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the toe is concave, then you must pierce it with the pointed cautery at a strong point to relieve the swelling.</end_of_turn>
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the toe is venomous, then you must cover the entire area around the swelling, if possible, and take care of the area around it as necessary.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is close to the foot, or on the belly, or in the bladder, or in the chest, and is near enough to touch, then touch it with your hand and if possible drain it out. Then remove the intestine or hernia and hold your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Method of forceps for the treatment of swellings:</start_of_turn>
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like the beak of a sparrow when they are affected by pain from the swelling so that they do not leave it behind.</start_of_turn
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are diverse species of forceps, great, small, few and many, according to the quantity of the greatness of the swelling and its scarcity, and the extent of the wound, and the constriction of the area.</start_of_turn
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Method of performing incisions in this limb in order to alleviate the pain of the swelling like the pain of a sparrow, and to administer a pulse to the area:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of performing a puncture of the area.</start_of_turn
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like this to alleviate the pain of the swelling in the concave area and to administer a pulse to that area.</start_of_turn>
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of the treatment of veins.</start_of_turn
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins that are usually bled during flebotomy are ...</start_of_turn of which there are sixteen in the head.</start_of_turn There are two pulsating veins that are close to the ankles, which are called the anterior tibial; two veins that are in the two temporal regions that appear; two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two holes that are called the aspicient veins; a vein that is in the middle of the forehead; a vein that is at the tip of the nose; two veins that are in the earlobes; two veins that are in the lips; and two veins that are on the tongue.</start_of_turn
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are bled during flebotomy in the limbs are about five.</start_of_turn Except for the cephalic vein which is in the temple and is called the great vein of the head, and is dark; the people call “the head vein”; the vein is small, and is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; and this one they call “the vein of all the body”; the basilica vein is one that is stopped in the domestic latch and is called “citellar”; and the people call those “the belly veins”; funis of the arm, which is stopped over the elbow and is the one that is bled during flebotomy, and that appears on the outside of the elbow due to its visibility; and the ulnar vein which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and is in these two branches.</start_of_turn
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the ankle there are three veins; one of which is beyond the curvature of the bone of the little toe; the second is the sural vein, the place of which is beyond the ankle of the domestic latch; and the sciatic vein, the place of which is beyond the ankle of the little toe; and in the ankle there are other veins similar to these.</start_of_turn
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are close to the ankles is to cauterize the ancient varicose veins, embolism, hematoma and old ulcers of the head.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of cauterizing these veins is according to what I recommend to you: that the head of the patient should be calm and the head of the patient should be frequently supported in the occipital region where the two veins are close to the ankles in two depressed places of the head; and that you should tighten the patient's limb with a bandage around the area where the two veins are close to the ankles in two places. And if you feel faint from these veins, here is a sign that you should stop.</start_of_turn
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then take hold of the lancet, which is the one that is incidental, and bring your hand with the vein and the cord to the parts below and pierce the vein at the point of incidence.</end_of_turn>
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do it as well as you can.</end_of_turn>
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen the area with powder and leave that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already before we begin, we must make the incision of those and cauterize them.</end_of_turn
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two veins or arteries that are in the temples that help with the phlebotomy is the ancient emigration that is bad and slow and bilious and acute edema of the bones.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's limbs so that the two veins appear to the sense of sight manifested and be confirmed by their pulsation that they are those. And when you see that, then do it.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then elevate the cord above the vein to the parts below as I have said indicated, and make the phlebotomy incision from outside, and elevate the vein in its place; and pierce that as well as you have done with the two veins above; and do it according to the amount of your need.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then remove the dressing from the patient, and rest the hand over the vein for an hour, and then put a compress over that bandage and powder and strengthen that area with strong constriction, and leave that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already before we begin, we must remember the incisions and the traction in the beginning.</end_of_turn
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein to the ancient diseases of the face and to emigration and dropsy and fetid ulcers.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is according to what I recommend to you; so that the patient tightens his limbs with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take hold of the instrument which is called forceps of which this is the form.</end_of_turn
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture immediately which is at the head of the forceps over that vein and pierce it at a slant or in another way as you desire; and let the blood run out according to the amount you want; and then remove the perforation of the patient and strengthen that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And many veins are opened by phlebotomy, but it does not mean that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity just as the others, because it is of remote extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the traverse, that is, when the bone is properly and firmly grasped in it.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the benefit of the two veins that are in the tears of two eyes for the scab of the bones for dropsy and swelling in the bones, and to the diseases of the face.</end_of_turn>
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tightens his limb with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you remain standing above his head.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the phlebotomy be done according to the traverse of a little distance to the phlebotomy of a little distance, because in the place it is not bone; and if the phlebotomy is superficial, firmly grasp the limb at that point.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood run out as much as you need, and rest over those parts, and strengthen them for a night, and then remove them.</end_of_turn
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is concerned with acute fever and violent sweating, and with the diseases of the face and emigration and dropsy that occur in the face, and more especially when it is ancient.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that the patient tightens his limb and brings his nose to his left hand, and takes the phlebotomy superficial long and stays in the middle of the head of the nose according to the rule, because the vein does not appear to the sense here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Beware that you finish your hand with the phlebotomy little by little and make the blood run out according to your need; and keep that for a night, because that is restored with delight.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrating the body results in pain in the feet, which is commonly called gout by doctors.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the inflammation of those is that the patient suffers from some degree of swelling in the groin; and the artist should place their hands over the head of the patient, and the patient should sit on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then gently massage the vein along with the large and small flebotomy; and extract blood in accordance with the temperature or as often as necessary; and do so with the other vein as well
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the ligament and tighten the two veins slightly more to prevent the patient from fainting, and leave the wound open until the plague is healed.</start_of_turn>
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The benefit of the flebotomy of the veins is to relieve small boils and pimples of the mouth, corruption of the gums, harmful ulcers and fissures, and harmful ulcers that are in the nose and in the surrounding area.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the inflammation of those is that it causes the patient to vomit immediately, tightens the throat, and causes them to turn their lips blue; two veins should be ligated, one from the right lip and the other from the left lip; and the mark of some of them is that the color of some of both is black; and more so in the surrounding area of those veins are many small black veins; and where any of them has been pierced, there is an opening.</start_of_turn>
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you are in doubt, do not hesitate; and do not know which of those is the cause, when you arrive at the incision of the greatest of them, and the discharge of pus from them will be evident.</start_of_turn
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Like the two veins that are in the lips outside.</start_of_turn>
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is more common for them to puncture the two veins that are in the lip outside.</start_of_turn
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More useful for the two veins that are in the lip outside is the flebotomy of the cephalic vein to prevent the swelling of the tonsils, the disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of bleeding those is that it follows the patient between their teeth until it spits out the tongue, raises the tongue and holds the tongue from the one side by the vein and from the other side by the vein, and the color of each of them is turning black.</start_of_turn
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And so bleed each one; and take care that you do not touch the vein with your hand, for it is an artery.</start_of_turn
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the groin are usually those in which people usually bleed in all households, and the flebotomy of these is useful in two ways: either by making multiple small punctures or by making a large puncture with an olive-shaped needle that is blunt at the tip. Or by making a small incision and applying pressure until bleeding stops; and this is the way to do it.</start_of_turn
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This is because you must section and remove those small blood vessels and those that are thin according to the size of the veins and according to the degree of tightening of those.</start_of_turn
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of small puncture:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Both the veins and the surrounding area appear to contain thick blood clots that are visible on the surface.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of making a large puncture with an olive-shaped needle:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This is a smaller puncture with less external pressure, and it is suitable for bleeding from thin veins that contain thin blood clots.</start_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The greatest benefit of the flebotomy of the basilica vein is that it is one of the three veins that extract the blood from the swelling of the tonsils and the gut, and from which blood is drained from the feet and the belly.</start_of_turn
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	The flebotomist should take great care when performing this flebotomy, as if it were an artery, and if there is a slip or mistake in the puncture of the flebotomy, they will puncture the artery and blood will flow freely, which will cause the patient to faint if it is not stopped immediately.</start_of_turn
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear to be bleeding immediately, then you should leave that one and move to the other, or seek some other branch nearby; or that you bleed from the end of the arm, which is also bleeding profusely; and you should clamp that one immediately as well, as we have said.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May be if you want to perform a flebotomy on them, then cover the wrist that touches the part until you reach the elbow; and then hold it firmly there; and ligate the wrist and cut the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and keep pressure on the area until the bleeding has ceased.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you have said, that the ligament is stretched, swelling in the place that you have marked with your thumb, then know that that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore stop that
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if sometimes blood flows during the flebotomy just like urine of a child, know that the blood is thin, for that is the blood of the artery; and keep your hand steady and pause the wound for a long distance; and then close the wound, and if the blood is clotted, know that the blood vessels have been torn; then strengthen your arm and let go of the wound.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the discharge of the wound, and be over-cautious of them and do not let them move for some days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Or if the blood is not clotted, and sometimes when you must not call a physician for this, then you must cut the artery if you see it; for the limb is contracted, and the blood is clotted; or that you take a short forceps, and take that out, and take hold of the vein with your thumb and strengthen that over the area of the stricture of the ligament and the powder within until tomorrow.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is clotted, it is not good; otherwise, know that you must cure that from which the clot of blood originates to the memory of the place where the blood vessels were clotted.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the amputation of the limb is difficult in many cases because of the smallness of the wound and the possibility of injury to the brachial ligament
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And from the jugular vein the flebotomy is useful that it removes the blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; for it is composed of the branches of the basilica and of the cephalic branch, as we have said
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the flebotomist in case of excessive fear in the flebotomy of the limb, for there is a nerve there; and when you prick the vein for the flebotomy and touch the nerve, you cause dizziness, and it is difficult for the patient to recover, and often does not recover at all; and this nerve is often hidden in many people and is subtle and is not shown. Therefore know that you must stop the flebotomy when you see it with the cut of the vein and avoid the nerve with your strength
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The usefulness of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it removes the blood from the head and comforts the pains of the limbs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And take care in this way, if you want the phlebotomist to prick with olive oil or with myrrh; for that is the saving of all the veins, for it is not of the artery nor the nerve
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, you must know that you must guard that during the flebotomy you do not prick the palm of the hand so only, but seek the place that is more likely, and do not touch it, if it is not found at the first percussion that is over that which is the flebotomy of some blood vessels
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, it is often forgotten in many people, when it is not performed at the first percussion, that it is not noticed in that lapse.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the flebotomy of that and the accidents of it should make you think of their rectification.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you must know that the flebotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health and in hope of recovery and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that the proper flebotomy is in one of the veins that are in the groin, that is: cephalic, femoral and basilica; and that the proper time for the flebotomy is at the beginning of spring, in the middle of spring and autumn, and in winter when there are significant signs of replenishment.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And the proper time for the flebotomy is every third day or at the first moment when three hours have passed since the morning meal
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Moreover, the flebotomy that is administered must not cause inconvenience or necessity for this, neither at night nor during the day, at any hour and at any time.<end_turn>
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And you must know that it is not appropriate to perform the flebotomy before the age of thirteen years, and in women it should not be performed before the fourth month after delivery, and in old people it should not be performed to those who have already passed their seventeenth year
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When someone wants to be treated for any kind of pain, let him modify his bowels before the blistering is done with the lithtrum, for if there is any retained wound there, so that the veins do not draw out the surplus from the blistering of the bowels, which are pushed, and that they do not damage the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Do not make the patients nauseous by excessive sweating or crapulence, nor avoid sickness or drunkenness until it has passed from them, neither bad air nor water-logging, and more than anything avoid excessive colica, vomiting, and eating, as well as excessive lying down, sleeplessness, fasting, or other causes that dissolve virtue, or be bodily or animal
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully the temperament of humors before giving him food and drink, and medicines if it is possible at all
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into water if any cause does not prohibit, or be exercised by any exercise so that the patient be relieved.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the blistering of the feet at the third hour, as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Beware that the foot of that patient be protected on that day from all kinds of animal accidents, as well as from annoyance, wrath, fear, and all bodily accidents, as well as from work, excessive sweating, and lying down and similar things to them.</start_of_turn>
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to his seat let him be present the causes from which it is customary for men to suffer from aromaticness and odor, and from fat and similarity to them, according to the quantity of possibility.</start_of_turn
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the phlebotomist over a cushion that is more solid than the cushion of that which must be phlebotomized.</start_of_turn
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And take hold of his arms, and cool that with your hand the phlebotomist twice or thrice; and tighten the ligature with cord and involve that twice.</start_of_turn
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And be the tightening temperate, which is neither too tight nor too loose, for the tightening when it is excessive prohibits the flow of the patient; or is too little, and the patient's body is exhausted.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And tighten the ligature so that those who must be phlebotomized cool their hands between them until the veins are swollen, and declare it to the feeling.</start_of_turn
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the phlebotomist should anoint the patient's vein with a little oil beforehand; and then stop the patient's hand with his left hand on that vein from which the phlebotomy is to be made, so that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is relaxed because the vein is the one that has been struck by the phlebotomy, and that is full of air when the phlebotomy is stopped over that one, and is discovered by the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not break the vein, and if it breaks, that is stretched.</start_of_turn
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, in order that the phlebotomist should be calmed and be asked in all these matters.</start_of_turn
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And in case the vein is punctured in a vein, more than that, do not do it; otherwise you repeat what you have done and leave that place a little, or do without fasting.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is swollen, or the patient becomes pale, do not tighten the ligature, for that will cause excessive swelling, or do not enter the water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.</start_of_turn>
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the patient is recovering well, and you fear that the patient will not recover the amount you wish, then repeat the phlebotomy in that place according to the rule and adjust a little in the opening, and do without fasting until the place is swollen, for the place is swollen in many people because of little opening.</start_of_turn
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	More often than not, if the patient has already swollen, do not repeat over it, for that is not for you to do for any cause; and pause on any part of the wound of oil, which alleviates the patient's body.</start_of_turn
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place than oil and the others.</start_of_turn
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer the wound of oil in every phlebotomy in which you puncture the veins due to the prohibition of the patient's body, and make it thick and viscous when it is stopped from one of those over the place, for the patient is calmed and is relaxed when it is small.</start_of_turn
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the place of the flebotomy there is generated great swelling, which causes veins to burst especially in those which have not bled, or in the opening of the small vein, then immediately stop the procedure and place over the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, with a little vinegar, and keep it there for an hour, which is sufficient to dissolve it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And that you do this immediately with the blood of that vein or with another vein.</end_of_turn>
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you stay in the place for a few days, any black or green discoloration does not matter; and if you wish, stop the cause of this discomfort and dissolve it with mercury, or any cause of saliva or bile or something similar.</end_of_turn>
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The veins burst causing swelling and eminences, therefore the flebotomy should be performed from the basilica.</end_of_turn
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore stop your hand there, and if you notice that there is too much bleeding, put your compression there, for that swelling is bad and harmful; and know that you must stop any cause of that which we have said, for there is strong flow from the great vein.</end_of_turn
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And put on some plaster with water which is styptic, so that the area is firm, and take care of the other cure until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take out of the vein all the blood according to the quantity of its power and according to the color of the blood remaining in the vein according as it appears.</end_of_turn
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the vein is black, then leave it closed until it is well; and in the same way if you see it thick, leave it closed until it is reduced; and in the same way if it is acute, leave it closed until the pain has passed.</end_of_turn
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And know that whoever is full and strong and needs to extract blood in a single vein, that the flebotomy of the vein must be increased and be large.</end_of_turn
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in those who are pale, do the opposite, and know that you must extract it in small quantities, and that the bleeding must be slight.</end_of_turn
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing in performing a vein flebotomy is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of flebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and the injury of nerves, and is more useful and safe than the large and extensive flebotomy.</end_of_turn>
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which it is customary to cause syncope you must perform the flebotomy, and know that you must treat it before the flebotomy with a little piece of bread infused in wine instead of a thousand grains or of simple vinegar; and extract a little of the blood from the vein in three or four doses.</end_of_turn
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold sensation of congestion, then before performing the flebotomy give an infusion of eyewater with mercury or with aromatic eyewater with spices such as cinnamon, ginger and the like, or with aromatic and fragrant eyewater.</end_of_turn
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if there is a fainting during the process, know that it is due to the lack of blood, and immediately stop and give wine with aromatic water; and use aromatic plants such as chamomile, and keep the patient's legs well bandaged.</end_of_turn
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes which have been said in the division on fainting for evacuation.</end_of_turn
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to avoid fainting and dissolve the blood as quickly as possible, know that the flebotomy is for the evacuation of the blood, and the power of it is cold, which evacuates the blood slowly, according to the quantity of the power in the continuous days.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Whoever wants to avoid fainting and recover the blood as quickly as possible, and the body is strong, then do the first flebotomy within seven or eight hours of the first flebotomy.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Whoever wants to withdraw the blood from the body contrary to the part which is declining, know that this must be done on the second or third day.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Whoever in a body in which there is no blood left is acute and causes the fever, know that you must extract the blood from the vein in a single dose and extract a large quantity of it and amplify the opening until fainting does not occur, because you have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and that you place your hand over the pulse of the vein you must prevent the patient from dying from fainting, because sometimes the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.</end_of_turn
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do what you want to loosen the arms and evacuate the blood according to the measure, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to bleed the blood, for you must praise above all these things and extend your hand widely, because too little is too bad.</end>
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The patient's limb is flexible; or remain with the acute pain of the phlegm which is coagulated in the orifice of the vein; or suspend over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sage, and compress that which is until the phlegm comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is congested, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the congestion is calmed.</end_of_turn>
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessary you must evacuate the phlegm according to the situation, and it is not an excuse, then do so over that area or in another vein on the other arm.</end_of_turn>
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis brachi" is flexible in the place of the flesh or the bone, when it is not inflamed or hidden, which is composed of those.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebitis of the limb is that the patient inserts his hand into cold water until the pain subsides and the vein appears clearly.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then strengthen that area around that ligament and stricture, and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not latitudinally or longitudinally.</end_of_turn
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that over the wrist joint a little.</end_of_turn>
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the phlegm is prohibited, then repeat the hand in cold water and let the phlegm run in the water until you achieve your purpose.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	May it be on the days of summer, however, you are excused from the repetition of the hand in cold water, and the body of the patient is kept in cold water during the summer.</end_of_turn
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than all the others, for there is no pulsating vein or nerve in it.</end_of_turn
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The phlebotomy of the swelling of the right wrist is related to the diseases of the gout.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of the limb is that you strengthen the hand by ligament or by hand, since you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and is clearly shown at the same time; and phlebotomize that transversely; and if you prick it from all sides it will not cause any pain.</end_of_turn
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care that you do not touch your hand with the phlebotomy, because you leave the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And repeat the hand in cold water and let the phlegm run in that, for if you do not repeat it in cold water, the phlegm will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and there will be no flow.</end_of_turn
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the phlegm is extracted according to the amount of need, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified too firmly; and keep the area covered so that your fingers do not become stiff.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More helpful is the phlebotomy of the swelling of the left wrist, because it is related to the diseases of the spleen.</end_of_turn
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the phlebotomy of this.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The benefit of the phlebotomy of the median vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as major diseases, retention of menstruation, and diseases of the tonsils and ulcers of organs and ancient wounds.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of the limb is that the patient puts his whole foot in cold water and makes on that friction until the veins appear; and place a bandage over the wrist joint and the area of the vein that appears must be obvious, and from that branch out on the face of the foot several veins.</end>
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore phlebotomize the most extensive branch or leave the bandage over the area where the swelling is to prevent the accumulation of blood, which is better and more salt.</end>
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that area of the foot, then you must guard the nerves that are left over that area of the foot, and suspend your phlebotomy at the point where you phlebotomize, as if you were pricking it.</end
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And be careful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May it be prohibited to remove the phlegm; however, repeat the foot in cold water and let the phlegm run in that until it is evacuated.</end>
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the surgeon errs in the first portion of the procedure, repeat the operation a few times until the area is completely healed; for the limb is salt. Do not fear the patient's malice, but beware the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	In the same way do from the other foot the engagement.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the sciatic nerve, as we have said, its place is beside the heel, leaving the heel bone free from the hairy part of the limb
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The aid for the phlebotomy is the support of the ankle when it is for the healing of the burn.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient groans, sweats and tightens the clothes of the lower part from the hip down to the heel, up to four fingers, with a long bandage that does not appear except for this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore when it appears, repeat the phlebotomy as many times as possible and as the situation demands, for it is better; or insert it by incision or remove it by excision, for the limb is salt
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men more hidden; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the sensation of all, repeat the phlebotomy on some part of it, for that which appears in the two feet between the thumb and the ring finger is the most significant.</start_of_turn>
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Beware of the nerves, and make the amount of healing run as much as you wish
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the tension and place over the place of the phlebotomy a cushion and tighten the limb, for the curious thing is healed.</start_of_turn>
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the draft and the qualities of using these things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Drafts are of corn, or of hemp, or of ivy.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the draught is done in two ways: one is by sacrifice and extraction of pus, and the other is by draught without sacrifice.</start_of_turn
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this draught that is without sacrifice is done in two ways, that is either with fire or without fire.</start_of_turn>
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the draughts that are administered with sacrifice and extraction of pus are fourteen parts of the body, of which one in which the draughts are stopped is the ankle; and the second part of the head; and the third part of the neck; and the fourth part of the chest; and the fifth part of the abdomen; and the sixth part of the groin; and the seventh part of the knee; and the eighth part of the elbow; and the ninth part of the wrist; and the tenth part of the thumb; and the eleventh part of the index finger; and the twelfth part of the middle finger; and the thirteenth part of the ring finger; and the fourteenth part of the little finger.</start_of_turn
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the draught does not extract pus from the great veins, but from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for this it does not recover the virtue of these; just as is the case with phlebotomy; neither does it suffice that the draught should be done with fire or without fire in any disease that is not cured by emptying the whole body.</start_of_turn
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if it is necessary to provoke a draught for disease or for maintenance, administer it at the beginning and at the end of the month, and in the middle of the month and at any time.</start_of_turn
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in some men there is an excess of blood that must be extracted by draught, and they find in the chest a great weight and bitterness; and in those there is repletion and swelling in the face and chest, and in the neck; and in those there is a sudden eruption in the face and brow, and shadows and faintness in the eyes; and in those the vomit of the draught; and in those the laughter is multiplied; and in those there is a bad taste of blood in the mouth, or that the tongue is swollen and vomits blood; and in those their sleep is multiplied, and in those they see blood in their sleep vomiting, old men, plagues and other causes that remain with them.</start_of_turn
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore when several times in any of these causes, and especially if it is in the third or half of the month, they command that the draught be done more than two or three hours past the day.</start_of_turn
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the aid of the draught from the neck is that when it confers gravity to the head and to the water that is falling down the thighs; however, it does not suffice that it should be a prompt emptying of the whole body.</start_of_turn
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this draught is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.</start_of_turn
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not allowed for anyone who is fatigued completely, or in whom there is congestion, for it gives great harm to these people.</start_of_turn
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	For that reason we do not use those old remedies, and on the heads of those in whom the disease is fiery.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May it be that whoever continues to do this over them will be fruitful in oblivion; and for that reason we command the windwarder to place his hand a little above the heels, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The windwarder of alcohol is better than phlebotomy of the veinous blood and of the bile: and for this we confer the vomiting, and to the constriction of the bile and to the scissura of the bile's suffering, and to cough, and to repletion
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And we command that the vomiting of alcohol be covered with a little powder, for if it is stopped from below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the vomiting of almonds confers to headaches and ophthalmia, and diarrhea, and vertigo, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is better than phlebotomy of the veins
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And we command the windwarder not to touch his hand with a sacrifice so that he does not prick the artery and cause blood to flow backwards
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The vomiting from below will make the breath smell like vinegar, and will corrupt the gums, and will cause disgust towards the ailments that are in the mouth, and it is better than phlebotomy of the alimentary veins that are in the armpits
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The vomiting which is fruitful over the two spatulas confers to captan, which is fruitful for the repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the vomiting from under the ribs towards the flanks of the ribs confounds the phlebotomy of three veins, that is of the vein of the bile, of the vein of the spleen and of the cephalic vein, because those which accompany the blood from all the veins that are above remain in the trunk, and those smaller veins of the other veins which are more gross enter until they reach the attraction of the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And we command the windwarder not to proceed too far in the sacrifice, for the location is stripped of flesh, and the nerves and arteries remain there
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this is a vomiting that is made with wine and it confers to the swellings of the buttocks and to the ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And we command the windwarder that it be a great vomiting, and that it be of wine, for it digests with great heat; and that it be offered with a great sacrifice
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The greater vomiting of the legs from the lesser indicates that it expels the blood of the whole body, and it confers to the ancient pains of the kidneys and of the bladder, and to the vesicles; and it brings on the menses, and it confirms vomiting, and it is better than phlebotomy of two veins, and of the spleen, and of the liver.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But do not make it excessive in all the body, for it will cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the vomiting which is in the morning is very useful because it is similar to the vomiting of the two veins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the vomiting is that it stops the vomiting at the beginning of the meal and lets it out gradually, and do not prolong the position of the vomiting, but rather pause them leisurely, and remain there cautiously, and that the humors come to the place by themselves without forcing them.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop doing this until you see that the place has already recovered and has swelled and that the vomit has become strong
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you have sacrificed and iterated the vomiting a little at a time, and you have considered the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the gentle person who has soft flesh on his hands, command that you give him a little wine and do not give him more, for the place is not to be ulcerated
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the windwarder to expand the sacrifice and loosen a little, and to breathe slowly.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickness in the blood, then command that you give two wines, for in the first wine the passage of the subtle blood to the blood and the water of the blood is opened
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second one to the scrutiny of the acquisition of the thick blood
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is not fruitful, then command that the third wine be sacrificed for it to achieve the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood a little at a time or a little, suffice with a small sacrifice.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we sacrifice with a great sacrifice; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we command that we sacrifice for a greater sacrifice
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The depth of the scarification is only in the codena.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the codena is large, hard, tough, and has rough hairs, let the edges of the wound be softened with oil; if in summer, thus with oil of aloes or violets, or oil of marigolds, or almond oil; if in winter, then oil of marigold, or oil of lily, or chamomile oil, or saffron oil.</end_of_turn>
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the wound is large and purulent, let oil of amaranth, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil be used; and so on.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	Perhaps if the wound is of great extent and of tough hair, let it be prohibited to use oil, and let the edges of the wound be cleansed with vinegar or cold water, or with alum or with rose water.</end_of_turn
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the wound has moisture, cleanse the wound with vinegar or water of mint, rue, and similar.</end_of_turn>
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the wound is full of pus, cleanse the wound with strong vinegar or water of alum, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, or saffron.</end_of_turn
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	Let the wound be covered before it is washed; having washed it once or twice, let it be covered with a bandage for an hour or two, and let the wound rest.</end_of_turn
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the wound does not bleed during dressing?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the wound is cold and that which gives the phlebotomist is bilious and affects the wound strongly and inflammation, it is necessary to prevent any cooling causes, thus with many vinegar and lettuce, and alum, and salt, and chamomile, and saffron.</end_of_turn>
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And suspend meat dishes thus as poultry, and fish of all sizes, and dishes with bitter herbs, and give them only sweet things.</end_of_turn
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the wound is purulent, let them drink slippery wine or slippery barley broth, and rue, and fragrant herbs like marjoram between wheat and barley; and let them be advised to eat little and drink little, and abstain from meat dishes like poultry and fish and peas and beans.</end_of_turn
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let them drink more wine than food in the days of dressing and phlebotomy.</end_of_turn>
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let them abstain from strong drinks in a few hours before and after dressing or phlebotomy, in order that the main members may be comforted and that the wound be softened; and do not let them take garlic or onions.</end_of_turn
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However the wounds which are to be sacrificed must be of those that are on the flank and the heel, on the belly and the ankle, on the flanks, in the armpits, because in these places the sacrifice will not cause them any suffering.</end_of_turn
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for these but for the attraction of the limb's disease, thus as it stops the flow of blood from the limb to the navel; and they use this to dissolve the excessive cold of the limb, thus as it stops over the belly and the navel; because that softens the limb and causes it to swell and relieves the pain which comes from the cold.</end>
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is finished concerning the wounds when they happen in their boiling or purulent state, for by their attraction it brings forth a great boiling and expels the pus from its place.</end>
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And in the same way it is done when it is stopped over the flank and the heel, it should be stopped over the belly and the ankle to remove the cold from those areas.</end
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These wounds are administered only with vinegar; and some are administered with oil as well.</end
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered with lukewarm water in the diseases of the belly.</end
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is for making the wound full and great, so as to be lukewarm water alone or water in which suitable herbs are boiled.</end<end_turn>
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Method of administering the wound with oil: the breadth of the opening is two fingers; the quantity of oil is like that of a palm; and it is to be applied around the circumference, like the quantity that can be held by a needle.</end>
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let the physician see the vein transversely of yellow or iron, where the candle is fixed at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already let the wind be greater of that which we have recommended; and the little warmth of that according to the diseases and the state of that whom we serve
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of the elderly and extend so others than the winds of the young and of great age
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this wind with fire on the limb is that it extends the marrow with fire of decent wood giving a little candle of wax, and stopping that on the vein transverse in the middle of the wind, so that the fire is kindled around the parts that are not on fire so that it is not consumed by the fire of the disease
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then let it be stopped on the limb of the patient, and let him be told what we have told him, until when we have the winds and we do not need to tell him that they are going to go away and that the vapor is going to rise from that wound, the wind will be so much dispersed.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And quickly ignite the marrow according to its manner, and repeat that if you do not digest from that.</start_of_turn>
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or wound, and it is not administered except that it is full of water, and it is stopped only on the limb alone.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this wind the greater it is, the better, for that it receives a great quantity of water.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xcvii.	The end.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood does not circulate in all limbs but in the limbs in which it is not possible to position veins, because of the smallness of those, as well as the thumb and little finger and the nails; or in limb denuded of flesh, as it is said of the nose and when the nails resemble.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those which you have found in the waters of poppyseed muddies.</start_of_turn
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be left lying down day and night in poppyseed muddies until they are faint, and that no remains any cause in the belly of those; and let it be evacuated from the body in the beginning with a flebotomy and with winds; and let the limb of the patient be cooled down until it turns red; and let them be stopped on it.</start_of_turn
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and calm.</start_of_turn
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the cavity with the wind, it is better later in healing.</start_of_turn
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then let the cavity be washed with warm vinegar and add some more water; and let it be washed and squeezed out.</start_of_turn
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the healing is prolonged, add some lead to the vinegar, and let that be placed over until the residue is gone.</start_of_turn
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the healing is multiplied, let there be powdered over it vitriol thrice ground, or eggs and that resemble their causes stiptics, until the healing is complete; or let it be stopped on the limb the masses of beeswax scraped out, and let them be left until the beeswax adheres to the limb, and the healing is complete.</start_of_turn
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when it is possible to change those.</start_of_turn
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then let the cavity be washed with the recent blood or leave a needle in the cavity until the healing has taken place; and let it be stopped, for those will feel some sensation of healing as soon as they feel some sensation of healing.</start_of_turn
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to close, sprinkle over those a little of powdered aloe or salt or ash, and cover well.</start_of_turn
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus ends the third part: restoration.</start_of_turn
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very useful necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation of the bones.</start_of_turn
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son of you who rejoice over this chapter the learned doctors and the vulgar people and those who at some time do not remember the ancients or do not read their letters.</start_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, the methods of these scientists on our land are a private matter; and I have never forgotten it at any time since; and I have not published anything about it until now, except after studying the works of the Ancients and researching the understanding of those, until I had extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have added experiments and studies to this length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already mentioned in this chapter all that pertains to my science and the experiments I have conducted on this; because I have abridged what I have said to you before and spared you the details; and I have brought them together at the end of the abbreviation; and I have shown you in the end of the declaration what forms of treatments are administered in this case, as it is stated in addition to the declaration, just as I have done in the two previous chapters
Capitol primier.	Chapter First
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of the fractures of the bones, from which the preceding preface is necessary, before we begin to remember the fractured limbs and the various affections of each one
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, in this chapter we will speak of the summaries of the speech; and the chapters that follow relate to the understanding of those things which in the beginning were forced to the artifices and to remain in the truth of those; so you and those who are skilled in this art will know or learn this noble science from me
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore I say that when an accident occurs to an arm, a dislocation, a twisting or a wound, the hour covers that you should immediately apply a ligature or support that part, or whatever else, if you do not prevent any cause, even if it is due to an injury, or if that which has happened is an infant, or an old person in decrepitude, or if it is a time of violent heat, or violent cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And we must take care in food to eat herbs and fresh vegetables and fish of fowl and crabs; and we must prohibit large meats and fatty foods and all food that fills the veins of the sick, except if you are certain of its safety, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter from the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And the hour returns the patient to their first seat where they usually sit.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, the hour covers that the patient should not be given nourishing foods of large quantity and weight, such as broths made of flour with water, broth, eggs, fish, calves' brains, blood, turnips, peas, and large vegetables, because in this regimen there is a beneficial coagulation of the fracture more quickly and gently
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You must know that bones that are fractured in the home are in the first degree of violence and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they should continue and be consolidated according to their nature because of the drying out of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature until the drying out of those limbs; and they are continued and consolidated until the end of the lenient period, just as the bones of young children
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature itself adjusts and remembers that every fractured bone in any part whatsoever, which has increased in size that adheres and strengthens that which is together until it is congealed and bound together, until the end of its suffering and rest, just as fire at the beginning, except that no cause prevents that from its works
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	Therefore it is necessary that you stop feeding the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said above
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many different fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	You must know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limb, for example, the fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the forearm; and similarly all the others are diverse among them
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I remember from all the species of fracture, which are exposed in the separate chapters of this book.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many different fractures in themselves are made.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diversified in the species of fracture of the bone in themselves; for example, a curved fracture is different from one that occurs in the stars; and some fractures are caused by a long bone: and these include fractures of the hip, ankle and elbow, which are caused both by violent and non-violent means, just as it is said in the lament when writing is prepared, and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and it is a slight fracture
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each species is an own pain or discomfort in the restoration of the limb according to what will be remembered in the different places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motion signal of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus is known as a fracture of the bone: it is twisting of the limb, and from that protrusion and prominence of the limb to the feeling, and so from it when one compresses it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting of the limb nor is it suspected to be a fracture, do not touch the bone immediately when you touch it, for the patient does not experience great pain; for there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There is also the possibility of slight twisting or a small fracture, whereupon you do not need to press on it with your hand or compress it; there should be a pause here concerning the medicines of which you remember; and immediately apply that which seems appropriate at that moment.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that when the limb is bent and is not broken in two or otherwise that does not cause it to swell up throughout, as is remembered in general throughout its part, then it is necessary to commence immediately to rectify it when it has happened, because of the following day
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If it swells up the following day, then leave it for some days until the swelling has gone down; and then apply whatever method you can to lift and support it
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration of the limb and its elevation is lighter than the bone from which the swelling comes.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And thus remember what has been said.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More especially if in the bone there are swellings, it is necessary to extend this limb fractured from two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And keep your position so that the limb lies naturally, while the fractured parts are extended from the limb, so that you can return those attachments with the hand and in whatever way you can to their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care that you do not cause further pain or damage to the patient during your operation; and apply your force as you are able to one bone with the other companion in many different ways
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And take advantage at that moment of your touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is some other cause, rectify that and support that to the extent of your ability
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression, just as many learned doctors do who make the swelling go down with their treatment or cause constriction of the limb in the course of their treatment of their patients
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And thus note, equating, and performing a decent operation and stricture of that limb, rest, tranquility; warn the patient about that and make him quiet so that he does not move in the hour of his vigil and of his sleep, and see his recovery and agitation, and do his egestion, and do all his movements with all your skill; and wait until the position of the limb is the position in which the pain is ensured, for that is when it is in the position of the limb in which there is no pain; and keep in that way that the limb is neither too flexed nor too extended, so that no twisting occurs when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the stricture of the limb is that which I recommend; for you know that fractured limbs are diverse in their size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And as for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the wrist, and similar to those, the covering should be of soft material
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And as for those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, cover those with firm and hard covering, which connects the great limb firmly and strengthens the whole limb in its entirety, without causing any bruising
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And thus commence, make your evacuation of equipment ready, and place the convenient bandage on the place of that fracture with three coverings or four as the limb deserves; and strengthen your hand a little on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And look at the part furthest from the fracture, and strengthen less than you have strengthened the fracture site itself.<end_turn>
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And gradually lengthen the covering of the fracture site, and soften the stricture little by little until you can remove the part of the limb that has healed well.<end_turn>
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And thus take another bandage and cover that bandage over the fractured limb with the covering, and look at the covering towards the end of the fracture; and do your operation concerning the stricture of the covering and the softening of that as we said in the first covering.<end_turn
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	If there is a swelling or fracture that causes pain, and if in it there is pain; pause in it until the swelling has gone down; otherwise do not pause in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	If there is no swelling or fracture, pause over the other thing, and cover these loose covering adequately until there is neither swelling nor pus coming out of it. When there is pus coming out of it and swelling, leave that for a while; and when there is neither swelling nor pus coming out of it, keep the covering on it.</end_of_turn>
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if it is of hemp or flaxseed, let the width of each strap be known; or if it is of leather or palm leaves, let the width of each strap be as follows: ...</end_of_turn>
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But cover that the strap which is placed over that fracture is thicker and narrower than the others, and the length of the strap according to the size of the limb; and strengthen over the straps with another thing according to your first order; and keep it firm in place according to what we have said of order, that is, that it should be as strong as the fracture itself, and the more the fracture is elongated, the weaker the order.</end_of_turn>
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	But cover that the threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, and of silk; and if the threads are coarse, thus it has been seen in the operation of many fools who have left the order during the stitching, and that is a great error, when the order is not equal.</end_of_turn
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve strength in the order with those that you wish, and do not cover that there should be less than a finger between the straps.</end_of_turn>
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is suffering from the extremities of the bones, pause the order until those of hemp or linen have been taken out of the place where they do harm.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some doctors call fracture a wound, and accident a disruption of the tendon, and I remember that in the capitol there is a singular thing.</end_of_turn
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that a broken limb is not immediately straightened with the straps on the first day; the reason for which is that when the limb is great, it does not cover that you should pause over the straps but rather after a few days or eight or ten, according to your security of the coming out of pus.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way in which the ancient restored the limbs, who paused over fracture, dislocation and twist.</end_of_turn>
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of dressing as used for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complex and mostly for women and men, because it is of that from which neither heat nor cold escapes: and take powder of millet, which is the kernel of wheat that hangs behind the movement of the husk in the belly of the millet.</end_of_turn
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And keep that thus, but if there is album of blood, stop the bleeding of it that is not thick or viscous; and use that for that.</end_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of dressing is for fracture, dislocation and twisting: recipe of asphalt, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and marigold, which is ground from a thousand grains of saffron, by five drachs; of myrrh and aloes by five; of alum by twenty. All these are triturated and sifted and mixed with water or with egg white if the patient's wound is raw; and use this dressing, which is of good composition and strengthens the broken bones immediately, and gives confidence to the people.</end_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of dressing which is useful for fracture and twisting: recipe of marigold and white alum by five drachs; of myrrh and aloes by five; of acacia by six; of chamomile by two.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All things are pounded in mortar with mortar inside, and they are sifted, and they are made comfortable with water or with glue of oil and are administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Treatment for joint pain and separated bones at these locations, and for pain in these and in fissures and fractures: take dry lancets and immerse them in vinegar and oil and apply over the area.</end_of_turn>
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of evacuation of pus, but it expels pain properly.</end_of_turn>
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores the fracture: take figs and poppyseed leaves; mix them up and make plaster of them.</end_of_turn>
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of short plastering administered after restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining pus: mix parsley, chamomile and violets flowers, barley flour, and all together.</end_of_turn> Everything is pounded and made comfortable with wine, if the limb is not scorched.</end_turn>
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scorched, then comfort it with lukewarm water of colander or with water and use it.</end_turn
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering that is more solid in resolution than the previous one, when the abscess is firm, you must restore the limb: mix parsley, linseed seeds, barley, meadowsweet, marjoram, violets flowers, chamomile, and all together; pound them and make them comfortable with vinegar or other liquid or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the degree of its color.</end_turn
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Ipocras does not say that in the free belly it should be placed over the fractured limb except when a certain amount of wax and oil is made and no other cause; and I recommend that it be better between thickness and thinness.</end_turn
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Moreover, in Guinea it is seen that it should be placed over the fractured limb after the restoration of it and the causes in which it is exsiccated with little heat so as not to cause like mercury, cinnamon and nutmeg to do to them from those causes that we have recommended.</end_turn
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plastering that comforts the lesion and pain: mix millet, hazelnuts, ground poppy seeds or pepper of owl, parsley, salt, and ground beeswax; pound them and sift them and make plaster, and make a plaster.</end_turn
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Moreover, the amount according to which it should cover the binding and when it should be dissolved, is that you consider if there is neither excessive pain nor swelling nor the bone is fractured not to make it worse by its location, for when you do not remove it for a long time.</end_turn
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it happens at the location of acute pain or swelling or inflammation, when you should cover it or remove it at the time, and keep the plaster on it.</end_turn
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take sponge of lint and wet marine sponge, and immerse it in lukewarm water, and with that wash the area until the swelling and pain are gone; and then lay the limb still for an hour; and then place over it dry lancets immersed in vinegar and oil or scented oil, and bind over it for a night until you are sure that the abscess has gone down, and that the swelling of the limb has ceased, and that the pain has gone away.</end_turn
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with that stricture and make the plaster small and do not tighten it for your primary constriction, and leave it until it is healed.</end_turn
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the abscess, the redness, the pain, the swelling and all these accidents have already passed, and digestion of plaster and stricture is not necessary, when you do it as you did at the beginning when you put on the plaster.</end_turn
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause occurs to the limb of those that we have said, do not remove it until three or four days or five or seven days.</end_turn and some say that everything that is left must be left for xx days according to your appearance for the healing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture is healed, and the coagulacion of the marrow over that.</end_turn
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust in the stricture more than in your primary stricture throughout, and adjust in the nourishment of the patient's food, according to the memory of it.</end_turn
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Moreover, if sometimes the location of the fracture has already dried out and expanded more than that which covers it, know that the nourishment is prohibited from going there; and therefore mix that with lukewarm water throughout the whole meal that you will give it; and do this for three days; and loosen the stricture a little, and for this operation take nourishment to the limb, and it will be healed quickly.</end_turn></end_of_turn>
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than that which fools restore the fracture of the limb that has been neglected from the beginning, according to custom, is to restore it crookedly; for this is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it should be prolonged, it makes the ancients angry in their leisure and they will be angry with you for your work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have never seen anyone do this who does not think it is better not to do it
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter: On fracture when it occurs in the head
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are multiple, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are different, for some fractures are caused by the percussion of space, and the percussion hinders all the bones within the cavity, which is left with the bone, as happens in the forearm, and for this reason this kind is called traumatic; or the space penetrates any part of the bone, and penetrates the marrow but does not pass through the back of the bone; and this kind of fracture is called absolute elevation
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and the fracture that is crooked or twisted; and the cause of these is percussion with soft or hard material, and they seem to linger
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating which has already approached the nerve which is left with the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or little
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And fracture is that which is hidden in the bone, in the substance of the small vessel, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called capillary
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is a fracture which is caused either by violence or by percussion of stone and it persists, which makes every layer of the bone penetrate the parts adjacent, and is fatal in the concave place just as when it occurs in the heel when it is percussioned and a part of it enters the adjacent parts
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most of all it is fatal in the joints of humiferous bones, as well as in their heads of bone marrow
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And with all these kinds of fractures, it is necessary to break up the surrounding pieces as if they were separated stars
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come to regret all that is in this place
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these kinds of fractures by recognition on them and by their signs and symptoms and the corruption of the marrow that is over them
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary fracture is known because it is discovered on the bone, and is stripped away, and is limited above by a tent which makes the fracture black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More than anything in the treatment of fractures one must take into consideration the accidents of the patient, and when sometimes for the accidents that signify by their manifestation on the patient means fear, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and even the yellowing of the whites of the eyes and the stench of these, and if these do not disappear, he is not well.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if sometimes the accidental symptoms do not recur, you hope for health, the hour you begin the treatment of them
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is that if it is provoked at the beginning like that which is provoked in the days of autumn, the hour you must study in the marrow of the bone from the fourteenth day according to every custom
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, the hour you must keep the bone still from the seventh day, having to ensure that what is left of the bone is corrupted from the nerve, and that the symptoms which we have recommended appear
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the nerve covering the brain, and is split into small pieces and twisted, the hour you must insert the split piece and cauterize, as I have recommended to you
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you must take his head in hand who has the illness, and discover about the bone according to custom and handle him as you think best according to the figure of the illness, and be curious about the patient
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you discover the bone, flux of blood or caut abscess, the hour you oppose it with what you think is right, that you cover the area with wet cloths in oil and anoint with rosemary, and apply the plaster to the wound until the abscess has subsided; and be sure to drain the blood; and begin treatment by surrounding the bone and removing the bone.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is to insert the bone with a straight incision, and this is how it is done: And then administer another incision which is a little wider than the first; and this is how it is done:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And know that you must call by name various medicines, some of which are more bitter than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are at the back of the degree of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or are venomous.</end_of_turn>
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily in percussion on the medicine so that you do not bruise the head and damage that.</end_of_turn
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if it is strong and hard, know that you must pierce in the course of them beforehand that you administer the medicines while they travel, which are called superficial not deep.</end_of_turn
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus except when those that are around the bone stop at the end of it, so that when they travel the extremity is round or slightly above that which leaves the head of the bone like a margin or a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the substance of the bone.</end_of_turn>
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these superficial travels a great number of those that seem to agree with the substance of each bone, except when in all tests of the brain the extremity that is acute is present, in which case the quantity in length and breadth should be according to the quantity of substance of that test.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of superficial travels: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the fractured bone is that you pause the travel on the bone and rotate that around with the thumbs until you know that the bone has already been pierced; and then change the sponge to another place and leave that which is between every break the quantity of the thickness of the ray or withdraw that.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And finally give more bitter medicines than before.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that you must take great care that the medicine does not touch any cause of diarrhea.</end_of_turn>
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore when you have pierced the bone, and if it is continued with it, extract that and know that you must take that out with the scraping of the bone like another medicine, more truly and more subtly than the others.</end_of_turn
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there remains any small parts of the bones and fragments, know that you must take that out with ease with what is due to you from the sufferings; and then care for the wound with lint and ointment as we have said.</end_of_turn
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operating is light, long and laborious, which is to dissect Gualia and the lauzec for great pleasure; and this is their saying: It is necessary for you at the beginning to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and have left it the extremity of that medicine slow and leisurely of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the blunt part is round and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is of it in two planes forward and backward, as sometimes; that the blunt part is adjusted to the diarrhea with the face of the acute part that is incident on the bone.</end_of_turn
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And finally give more bitter medicines than before. And know that you must take great care that the medicine does not touch any cause of diarrhea. And when you have pierced the bone with a small instrument until you have inserted all the bone with ease as it is rotated, you must be sure of the safety that it does not happen by chance that something similar happens in any way, and if the physician was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.</end_of_turn>
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there remains any other adjacent cause to the bone in those places of the bone, the former will be with the extremity of the medicine blunt, and the latter will be facilitated, which is delirious from it without any document and without any fear.</end_of_turn
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the canal, and what is fractured or remains of the bone is the face of it, and remains in it asperities and subtle fragments, know that you must scrape that asperity and extract those fragments with subtle reasons for those for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that you can easily administer them in all places and the most useful of them according to what you lose in your operation that broken bone and its figure.</end_of_turn
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And know that you must administer at your leisure the amount of those reasons with which the bone starts the most bitter of all those reasons, and finally use more of the subtle of them, and do not stop doing that until you have administered the most bitter and the most subtle of all of them.</end_of_turn
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May in any of the other small fractures or cracks, cover that you administer care as it is necessary to rectify them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because it is not known about all of them that have studied in that art
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is what has been shown to us in great fractures
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the swelling is rectangular when you extract the bone, then cover that you take hold of it according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse that in scented oil, and place that over the orifice of the wound; and take another pad doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and oil, and place that over the first pad and make that the oil comes out of that wound without damaging it; and immediately administer about that ligament lime juice, and do not tighten that until the wound is only as wide as the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that thus for a day or two until you are sure of its stability; and then remove that and administer medicines which are useful for drying, such as rue seed and oatmeal, and poppyseed and alum, and similar to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And that you grind these medicines into a powder that is spread over the wound; and universally, administer any medicine that has the property of drying and not biting
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Observe carefully that the wound in your care is dry; and do not put anything greasy on it; neither let any wickedness remain in it; for when it is adjusted on the bone of the skull, it corrupts that and weakens that, and causes harm to the patient immediately
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And in the head, as in all other bones, when the care is weakened and the bone is softer, and is blackish on the surface; and therefore consider that if an accident occurs to the patient at this time, the things that we have said are sufficient to prevent all of that.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackening occurs except for the medicine that is being discontinued, and it is in virtue of that medicine that caused that blackening, then cover that you take two parts of that medicine and three parts of scented oil. And mix with that a sponge, and place that over the wound; and take care of that with the spices of care that you consider until it is healed
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is fractured
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not fractured but rather two fragments which are somewhat united by the surrounding soft parts, for in it there are two bones, and the part that is left is cartilaginous and is not fractured and does not cause it any harm except for swelling and pain and bruising
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	When one of the two fragments is fractured, then cover that you introduce little by little in the nose, and that you stabilize that fracture as much as possible, and as much as the force, until the nose returns to its natural shape
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And be careful that you do not cause any pain for your patient during this operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is at the upper part of the nose, and you say that it is not for that, then cover that it is equal to the extent of the ray in which the thickness is small
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two fragments, then do as above
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Keep the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, cover that you give it a rest of eight or nine days before resuming the care of the cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And put into the extremity of the nose a bandage of lead, if the fracture is in one part, or two cushions, if the fracture is in two parts, and of such size that it fills the cavity of the nose
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And tell the old restorers that the cushions should be bound over, and be changed throughout the day, although I do not see it; because it has to be covered with an ointment of lead with powdered gypsum; and do not leave the cushion on until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is solidified
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And many people put sponges in the nose instead of a cushion, because it is better than covering it with lead; and that the fracture of the nose is already violent and that the patient should not be prohibited from inspiration
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do one thing, or do the other thing.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another sponge comes loose after the cautery, cover the nose with earth or pack it with wine vinegar and scented oil, or with alum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May it be that if the burn does not happen after the cautery, then it covers that it is placed over flour of the size of barley and powder of burnt herbs with an album of oil; and it pauses over it to stop the lion, and do not leave it exposed for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured slightly or broken, then it covers that you score over them, and extract them with the instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the wound, and care for that which encloses and consolidates, and over which you place what is convenient
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a wound in the nose, then it covers that you cure that which is around it and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	The treatment is complete for the time being.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Restoration of the jaw when it is fractured
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is fractured and the fracture is not associated with a wound, it is necessary that if the fracture is lateral only, and is not fractured in two and is curved inwards, the cognizance is slight.</start_of_turn>
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you insert the middle finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; in the same way if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand; and push with that the swelling of the fracture inwards towards the outside, with your other hand over the outside of the bone; in this way you will equal that side.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two, then it covers that you administer extension of the two parts according to the rectitude until it is possible to equal them.</start_of_turn
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is movement of teeth with disruption, then stretch those which you hope will remain intact with gold or silver or gutta percha; and place over the fractured jaw a strip of silk or a piece of gutta percha, and place over the great pulp the silk that is conveniently suitable; and tie that which is sufficient to hold it in place, until it is not destroyed.</start_of_turn
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and abstain from eating of coarse foods.</start_of_turn>
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you observe that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you cover yourself and remove it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and plaster that which has remained with powder of wheat, with an album of oil, or with barley flour, because you have already given it enough of that, and place over the plaster a lion's skin.</start_of_turn
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when it is fixed and adjusted that plaster over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it in place, do not remove it until it is healed and strengthen the fracture; for it is observed that this fracture is stretched in three measures.</start_of_turn
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound happens after the cautery, then administer what has been said about the sensation in the delay until it is healed, and remove that wound.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is associated with a wound, then consider if it is a separated fragment or fragments, then you are ordered to retain those fragments with what is convenient for the removal of those which cause the torment.</start_of_turn
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound is straight, then you expand it with the flebotomy according to the amount of your necessity.</start_of_turn
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finally retained those fragments, and of those you will not remove any, then you close the wound if it is wide; and if not, place over that one of the plasters that is convenient and consolidate that, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .v.	The treatment is complete in this case.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Restoration of the thyroid when it is fractured.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The fracture of the thyroid is caused by the tension of the muscle behind it, and that fracture is made in three ways.</start_of_turn
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because either it is fractured, or separated, or is separated into two parts without causing fragments; and it is curious about the restoration of it; or that in it has caused fragments, and it is difficult to restore it; or that the fracture is associated with a wound.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is associated with a wound, is that you must have two assistants, so that one holds the fractured thyroid and the other extends the collar towards that part.</start_of_turn
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And cover the fracture with the threads mentioned until the shape is restored according to what is covered, and not too high or too low.</start_of_turn
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If digestion is insufficient, then stop the patient's shivering with a warm compress or a blanket, and adjust the size of the compress according to the degree of their need; extend and elevate the head and cover the body with your hand until the fracture is fully healed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If it is not possible to move the limb away from the wound, in order that it does not cause further pain, then cover the patient's face with a cushion and place a cushion under the muscle on the side of the wound
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The attendants hold the limb away from the wound until the bone of the fracture is elevated above the wound site, and then you can straighten the fracture and cover what is inside with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Even if sitting with the fracture and so much pain, cover that area and extract those sattages with ease
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, make an incision of the limb with one of the instruments which you have prepared for this purpose, because you have already stopped the fracture from causing damage to the skin; the cause of this damage is either swelling or bruising.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to the shape of a hernia; and let the width of the incision be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of the tissue.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Let the length of the incision be as you are able for the operation; that there be two limbs as many times as necessary, one wide and the other narrow
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the membrane which you have incised when you have extracted the swelling from the bone is wide, and you are sure of the hemostasis, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or if you fear hemostasis, then you can close the wound with cloth and powder according to the extent of the wound
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if there is bleeding from the cautery, then immerse the limb in wine vinegar and olive oil and hold it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is rigid when the wound is closed and the edges are secured, put on a compress of fine flour and eggshell powder, and place over it a sponge, and over that put on a sheet of linen, and cover that with the sponge, and over that put on a bandage of about three fingers in width and of the same length as the limb; and over that put on the dressing.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And in general, do not be afraid to remove the splint over the fractured bone; and so that you can see the patient every day, because when the ligament is softened or when the splint is already softened, then you can straighten it out again and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And put the patient in a position where the patient's legs are supported by the bed, and keep the patient's hands elevated about the level of the fracture; or keep the patient's arm bound to the bedpost
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the dressing if there is no bleeding or infection, until at least twelve days have passed.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Renew the dressing if you see the wound again, and straighten the fracture and restore it when the swelling has gone down and the fracture of the bone has coagulated.</end_of_turn>
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It is strengthened and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, and some walks on crutches are sufficient in a month of that time.
Capitol .vi.	End of document.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Treatment for fractures of the ankle.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The bone is fractured in the lateral part of the limb and not throughout the limb.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is fractured in the middle of the limb — and it is only fractured in the middle of the limb — and it is not known except by touch, then follow the figure of the fracture in order to prepare it and reduce it as much as possible in the natural way
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And put on a compress of fine flour and eggshell powder with a sponge; and put on a sheet of linen and cover with another sponge.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Even if the sponge is somewhat concave in some parts of the wound, then you can cover that concavity with the sponge and support the splint equally
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And thus stretch down their limb with a long handle from the constriction downwards until it does not yield from the heel bone.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament in each day; and whenever it is softened, join another soft one and stretch it equal to the heel if it yields from the heel bone
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And I grasp the patient over the ankle bone like that
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And thus when this number is completed, then dissolve the ligament, and know that what has been from the bones from which it began is not to be feared or dissolved
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the foot bone and place the tendon below, then split over it, and leave it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of the scapula after post-traumatic cautery if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .vii.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot bone.</start_of_turn>
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The bones of the foot are often fractured in the middle of the bone and there; may the extremities of it move forward that so cicatrices and diminished.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And as for the accidents of it when the middle of the bone is fractured, it is that it leans downwards to the inner parts and causes great pain, and difficulty in walking, and sneezing, and vomiting almost; and it is declared in the cavity of the fractured bone and is not hidden from the feeling.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that you rest the patient over the two ankles, and put between the heels of the patient a cushion; and then press on the muscles of the foot, and adjust the ribs of the foot to the greatest of two ribs, and support them in the operation of the foot and in the equalization as much as is possible and convenient, until you restore the shape of the bone as it was before.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And thus pause over the dressing and bandage and pause over the plaster of lime or of lead and keep them in suspension, as they seem to be floating; and cover that with a bandage; and support that which is above the fractured bone so that it is not painful; and gradually stretch that which is strict downwards; and consider the ligament in every hour, and when it is softened stretch that.</start_of_turn
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary to provoke the loosening of that, you must correct the bruising or swelling or pain or post-traumatic loosening that occurs in the place; then you should cover that and remove that and rectify what has happened by the manner of treatment of it; and then reduce the plaster, sometimes to the point that the face is reduced; and adjust the stricture until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.</start_of_turn
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You must know that the fracture of the ribs does not usually cause pain except in the parts which follow two; and as for the extremities of them from the front they do not cause to those surrounding them anything except for what is cartilaginous.</start_of_turn
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you must know that it is not hidden from the feeling that the inquiry of them must be made.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is in this way that it embraces the fracture as it is said above according to the possibility, except that it is embraced as much as is convenient, and then support the fractured bone with a plaster, if you wish.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning downwards to the inner parts, then immediately the patient suffers acute pain and puncturing, just as if it were a puncture that happened to that which has pleura, and for that reason it has the bone covered with a membrane; and it causes difficulty in swallowing, and sneezing, and vomiting almost; and this is a difficult healing.</start_of_turn
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients have devised in that matter an ingenious thing.</start_of_turn
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And thus they say: cover that which causes the patient to eat and drink that engenders swelling and wind, so that the belly is not swollen and is extended, and the fracture is fixed to the parts outside.</start_of_turn
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we avoid that because of that it is not the cause of causing post-traumatic caut, if not; and if it has already happened, then it helps that.</start_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And I say to you that it should be stopped from the wind and that you should make it with fortitude; and it is like reasoning, however, it is feared that the wind will draw out the humors from the place for the fracture.</start_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And he said to them: cover the wound with a bandage which is already submerged in oil, and sprinkle powder between the ribs until it is full, so that the ligature may be even when it encloses that which is round about; and do cure the disease with the care of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction of the disease which does not suffer, and if you put a needle point on the wound, remember over the disease, for when you cover the wound, uncover the fractured rib, and do place your hand over that instrument which preserves the liver, remembering that which precedes it, and that it inscribe upon them with ease, and extract that.</end_of_turn>
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And do adjust the two lips of the plague, if it is great, by boiling, and cure that which is inside until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it happens that the wound bursts, then do cover it with powdered charcoal in scented oil and place your hand over the wound, and that the disease be cured by that which covers the wound burst.</end_of_turn
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And rest upon the side on which you sleep, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of restoration of the fracture of the vertebra of the thigh and of the heel.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veins cause fracture to the bones of the heel, and start to attract them, and similarly to the vertebrae of the thigh.</end_of_turn
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such things happen to someone and you wish to know if they are healed or not, consider that sometimes the swellings are already softened and stupefying and dead and you cannot move them neither extend them nor flex them, and when you tighten them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not cause pain, then you know that they are not healed, and in such a state of affairs it is deadly.</end_of_turn
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you do that and feel pain in that tightening with your fingers and pricking, then you know that the bone is saved and the disease will go away with care.</end_of_turn
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the thigh like this and you wish to know if they are healed or not, then consider the pain in their feet.</end_of_turn
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if sometimes they are already softened, it happens in those which are excessive, and when you lie down on the two thighs, you feel a breeze and egestion is its will, and many veins are lying down on the two thighs and they cannot urinate, then you know that it is deadly, and do not work on their care.</end_of_turn
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May there not be any other cause of these, the cause is better and lighter.</end_of_turn
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the care of them is that you perforate the wound cautiously with a cautery which rests over the fractured vertebra, with scented oil only, or with some warm vinegar; and place your hand over that each of these veins gives blood until the wound is healed.</end_of_turn
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And do place one of the soft dressings that exist on that which is liamed; and command the disease to rest and be tranquil and not to sleep on the side where it finds pain until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you must remove the bone marrow or any cause that is already separated from it, then do cover that area with a bandage and keep that bone; and do adjust the two lips of the plague, with sutures if it is great; and do cure that which is in the belly of the wound, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the heel bone is fractured at the end of the limb, and this is the end of the age, then do put your left hand over the buttock and grasp the fractured bone with the other hand as well as is possible; and do place your hand over that plaster or bandage, if you do not approve of them, and do tighten that.</end_of_turn
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel bones fractured in this way, then do hold that above that, and keep that, and cure the wound with the care that is preceded until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoration of the limb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limb are thus fractured, and if they fracture, then the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and are inscribed in the length and decline towards the inward parts; and it happens to the disease pain in the area and puncture, and the limb is stupefazed when it is fractured.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture which is the shape of it.</end_of_turn
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the extremity, then you should embrace that part as it is until it is reduced to its natural position.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the leg or that it is already drooping downwards, then you should keep the patient comfortable by placing a bandage over the abdomen until such time as the fracture is set
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And thus when you have reduced that, place over it a dressing, and also place over the heel or the ankle a bandage, and tighten the bandage so that you do not fear puncturing from the fracture or removing the splinter.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Embrace the hollow part with that which fills it up so that the pressure of the bandage is equal, and command the patient to lie down on their side or sit up on their chest side
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If the wound should happen afterwards, then cease the extension of the limb and the restoration of the limb until the wound has bled enough; and place over it what is necessary according to what has preceded; and then return to the restoration of the limb, and tighten that again as before
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it should happen in the buttocks or be fractured, then treat them as well
Capitol .xi.	(End of document
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Note: The document ends abruptly and the last line provided is actually the heading of the next section of the treatise dealing with the restoration of fractures of the limb bones.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is that which is between the groin and the head of the thigh bone.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, the restoration of it is in two ways, of which one is to take the thigh bone flat with half of its breadth according to this manner:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And suspend it from the elevated place with two ligaments.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Keep the patient on a cushion; and gently draw out the fractured limb from the thigh until the nail of the limb reaches the middle of the thigh bone curvature
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if there is any great cause, or if the limb should hang downwards; and the physician should hold the fracture firmly in the buttock area until the fracture returns as it should
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient should lie on their chest and suspend the limb from the collarbone; and command two assistants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other holds the leg; and whichever of them extends it towards their part
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten over the fracture with a ligament and over that with another ligament, and whichever of the two assistants extends their two parts
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that half of the ligament over the nail and the other part the fracture from the groin
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly if the fracture is close to the groin, then cover that part of the ligament over that place and that part of the groin
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Embrace that which is easy to grasp and rest, and when it has been reduced as it should be, tighten that which has not bled
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If there should happen to be a wound from the cautery afterwards, then lay off the bandage for seven days, and put over it a soft dressing of wool and oil until the wound has healed, and then tighten that again
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to tighten is to place a dressing over the fracture, and then put a bandage of gut over the dressing; and adjust the limb over that adjutori and place your hand over the muscle of the thigh
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Rest the limb and tighten over the adjutori the arms so that the limb is in place without hindering any other cause of the fractured bone
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use crutches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And put over the fracture that bone which is more round and strong than the others; and place between each bone the width of a finger, and the length of the bones according to the fracture plus three fingers from the tip to the base
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And tighten over the bones at the fracture the one which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your bandage over the fracture area is more tight<end_turn>
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And if the fracture is longer, then the bandage should be smaller<end_turn
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus if sometimes the position of the bones and the bandage are as we have said at the time when we restored the limb to its natural position, then you should do it<end_turn>
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear a relapse of the cautery, then let the patient lie still for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Consider the ligaments throughout the body for three days so that they do not become inflamed in the process; or abstain from food in order that the member be devoid of surplus stricture; and thus correct all that we have said.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Even if you are confident that no other cause is present, do not remove the ligation before three days or more.</end_of_turn>
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Let the patient rest on their side with their knees bent towards their chest, and their feet resting on the stomach.</end_of_turn
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause with full coverage of greasy ointment on the wound, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not blistered or dissolved the figure of the fractured limb, or that the ligament is softened, therefore correct all this with your skill.</end_of_turn
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Abstain from food for the patient according to the order that we have given before, unless food is consumed sparingly from the beginning until it is digested; and when it is eaten, cover that the food is swallowed.</end_of_turn
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the use of the cautery and the dressing of the limb, they should be maintained for forty days; and when they are removed, bathe and medicate with the remedies that correct this.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is slight and retracted, then do not remove the ligature until the eighth day or two months.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.</end_of_turn
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm consists of two bones which are called two facets; of which one is small, and is called the thumb, and the other is large and is that which is fixed from the thumb, from the part beyond the thumb.</end_of_turn
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it is strong if only the large facet is fractured, or the thumb alone; and it is strong if both are fractured together.</end_of_turn
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small facet is fractured outwards, the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is more delicate.</end_of_turn
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large facet is fractured inwards, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.</end_of_turn
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worse of all is when both bones are fractured together.</end_of_turn
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the fractured bone is the small facet outwards, it is convenient for the doctor to postpone the restoration, which allows for painless healing.</end_of_turn
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if the large facet is fractured inwards, cover that you pause the extension even more vehemently.</end_of_turn
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both facets are fractured together, cover that you suspend movement as much as possible.</end_of_turn
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And cover that you keep the figure of the hand still during the restoration of the limb and its extension is supported on a cushion, and that the thumb is lower than the other fingers, and the patient is placed centrally over a cushion.</end_of_turn
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion under the limb at the level or below it, so that the patient does not exert themselves.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the attendants extend the arm from the part beyond the thumb towards the shoulder or towards the ligament, and another attendant extend them in the same way.</end_of_turn
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the doctor restore the bone until it is reduced according to the best possible figure.</end_of_turn
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is swelling in the bone, cover that you perforate the whole foot in the ankle with your skill.</end_of_turn
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears separated swelling that you do not expect to heal in the restoration, cover that you remove it according to the manner we have mentioned.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is mild, as I have already said in this treatise, take care of it.</end_of_turn
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if a relapse of the caut occurs at the beginning of your restoration, cover that you apply a bandage of fine silk or white wax, and be more cautious between stiffness and softness, and strengthen the bandage over that which is causing the stiffness until the relapse has subsided; and then remain the bandage and pause the plaster prepared from powdered gypsum with white clay, and put on the bandage; and let the support that is placed over the fracture be stronger and more firm.</end_of_turn
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The name of the bones in the arm is seen in great abundance, or a fracture in one or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And so, restrain the limb firmly over the fracture, and when more than one fragment remains below the fracture or below the lower parts of it, restrain the limb slightly less than before, as a reminder of the situation from the beginning of the chapter
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that cover the fracture should be soft and moist, not rough or dry, and the thread with which it is bound should be neither too tight nor too loose, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the ligament nearby for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause that requires rectification should arise, do so as promptly as the occurrence of the limb, and cover that you bandage the limb with cold water until the pain ceases
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Leave the limb still until it has healed, and then remove the restraint
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the limb is already softened and the bone is already reunited and resembling those things, then rectify everything with your skill
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider also if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive restraint, for it is necessary to soften that a little and leave it for several days until the nourishment returns, and strengthen that.</start_of_turn>
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If no other cause of those mentioned above should occur to the patient, do not remove the dressing for about xx days or so.</start_of_turn>
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the patient suspend their hand for their activity of movement, and make them sleep on two cushions.</start_of_turn>
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or the strong limb is restored in xxviii days, and all this according to the composition of the complex and the ability.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and the fingers.</start_of_turn
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that at the thumb of the hand and the joints of the fingers there must be a fracture, and that it does not occur to them except with wounds covered with a soft dressing.</start_of_turn
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or cut, it is necessary that the patient continue to hang their hand down and let it rest without moving it until the swelling subsides.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And so, the attendants extend the broken bones and the doctor should glue them together until they are well joined together with good adhesion.</start_of_turn
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And it is necessary to cover the plaster and bandage, if there is no further bleeding; and so remove the pin from the limb according to the amount of swelling, and you have already covered that with a bandage.</start_of_turn
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the lower parts of the limb you must support the belly of the palm, and make the patient keep their hand stretched out, and command the patient to strengthen that with their palm fractured; strengthen it with the hand itself.</start_of_turn
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the bone of the limb should be supported with a bandage on the palm so that the limb is applied to the palm; strengthen it as much as it covers.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outer parts, it is necessary to remove the pin from the limb and another pin from the palm side, so that the hand is open and flexible; and so restrain the limb slightly, as if rotating the hand between the fingers with the ligaments.</start_of_turn
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs to some of the joints of the fingers, if it is said to be urgent, then glue it according to the coverage and strengthen it with the palm of the hand, and if you want, support the little joint of the thumb so that the fracture is elevated and not crushed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the ring or middle or index or little finger, then glue it and bind it with the finger itself as many as are necessary; or bind them all together as a whole, which is better; or support the little pin as we have said above.</start_of_turn
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration, and in particular that of bleeding, the opposing and — with regard to the operation — the things that cover when any cause of those mentioned above occurs, as is repeated in the narration.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.</start_of_turn
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the buttock is fractured and is declared according to the feeling as having been converted to the anterior part and to the sovereign pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration is done in this way that the ligament is stretched over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient lies down on the belly and on the face.</end_of_turn>
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Maybe if it is close to the buttock, then let the ligament be firm at the fifth part, so that the extension will be in its place, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And in the same way if the fracture is close to the heel, then let the ligament be firm at the heel, and let the extension be to the lower parts.</end_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should bite the bone with both hands as much as he can until he reduces that which is according to the natural shape, and the bone is joined by a good connection; the hour that he covers with a compress and a bandage, if it does not happen to the limb afterwards.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Maybe if it happens to him afterwards, the hour you will leave that for five days until the swelling has gone down, and then return to your care.</end_of_turn
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be so tight: cover with a bandage over the fracture a hard bandage, and bend two or three times, and remove the excess; and then cover the wound until it reaches the ankle and the buttock.</end_of_turn
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And put long thread firmly between the buttock and the limb near the heel, and pass the extremities of the thread from the lower part of the pus sobirana of the two parts, and then roll over the limb and the buttock as much as the bandage allows.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then rest on the buttock in the place of that fracture and rest a star on the bone of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the gaps between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandage is solidified.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start to tighten the bandage firmly from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four covers, and when you have advanced to the ligament of the place of the fracture, your bandage should be less tight and lighter and softer.</end_of_turn
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then stretch two ends of the thread to the lower parts until it reaches the ankle, and tighten both ends of the star at the other side so that the ligament is not pulled from the place.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the bandage on for a while, so that no swelling occurs to the limb or heel swelling or pain; and if any of these should happen, then immediately take it off and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said above.</end_of_turn
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if the bone is bad of the bone that we put in, the hour that we bite it off is possible; and if not, go away from it and leave it, and take care of what precedes the memory until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Each bandage is to be strengthened in this fracture of the thigh as well as in the bones, as we have said in the instructions and in the arms.</end_of_turn
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Maybe indeed in the restoration of it in this way does not happen to the patient the fainting; and if it is restored alone, or if another one is applied to it, the hour that it is necessary that he close that from which he is fainting.</end_of_turn
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you must know that the thigh is strengthened in seventy days or a little more or a little less, and all this according to the diversity of complexities and of the other things.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Treatment for the fracture of the heel bone.</end_
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You must know that the fracture of the heel bone is very painful, maybe because of the tension of the muscles.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Maybe if it happens to her the fracture is only a fissure or crack in her parts, and that is with swelling or inflammation, and about that all is at rest with the feeling.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration is in this way that it is ligated again what is broken of the parts as we have said until it is united and joined as much as is possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then press the palm of your hand firmly and place it over the round stone, if you desire; and stretch your thumb away from your stricture to the extent that is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Consider all the precautions that have been recommended in other fractures, thus as well as applying cautery and resembling those that are opposed to any mishap that may occur until health is restored
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the limb.</start_of_turn
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the limb there are two bones, of which one is thick, and is called the limb; and the other is thin, and is called the bone.</start_of_turn
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And as for any kind of fracture concerning which it is asked that restoration should be made, as in fractures of the forearm, and for that reason restoration of the forearm is equal to that of the limb, and the operation is one.</start_of_turn
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are fractured together, the limb is converted to all parts.</start_of_turn
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is fractured, the limb is converted to the parts surrounding.</start_of_turn
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thick bone is fractured, behold that limb, for from these things you will not be ignorant.</start_of_turn
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligation of the fragments according to the healing.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Moreover, if the fracture of the limb is slight having no great displacement, that the extension be milder and lighter, and relieve by your skill.</start_of_turn
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the limb is any cause for operation on the forearm, and that is when you have healed the edges and that you have completed your operation, then you will take hold of the ends of the fracture that are paused due to the causes that are paused alone, and it will be enough to remove the stiffness of the palm of the hand; align these with those that are small in greatness, and do not touch the edges, and let the length of these be according to the length of the limb and the degree of bending inwards.</start_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then cover over any wound in two coverings according to their length, and place one over the part of the limb from one side and the other from the other side, and they should reach from the degree of bending inwards to the bottom of the foot.</start_of_turn
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two edges together in three places at the two extremities and in the middle, so that this structure of the limb is prohibited from leaning to the right and left, and that it remains in a good position.</start_of_turn
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now an armrest of paste is administered according to the length of the limb; and let the limb be fixed in it so that it conserves whatever movement.</start_of_turn
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Moreover, keep covered more than enough what is in the fracture, and when it is like this you will do it properly.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And finally consider every day the limb and study it in order to understand it better, and you will keep it from apostemas and from inflammation or from other causes resembling these; and when any cause of these occurs, then you will remove it from it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.</start_of_turn
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not usually fracture; however, the bones of the foot do fracture sometimes; and as for the toes of the foot, they rarely fracture, and it does not happen to them except in cases of great force.</start_of_turn
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot must fracture and sometimes those bones must be elevated between them, then you must place their heel on the prepared earth like when going.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place the heel over what is elevated of those bones, and then plaster those, and press, and heal those until around them.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then press the plaster and stop displacement, and place under the heel of the foot a small board to which are attached two caps of plaster.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then stretch that which is under the heel to a descending stretch, since you have covered that with bandages and other causes that you do not indicate.</start_of_turn
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will remove the ligament, because you will find the bones healed, or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in these is like that of the physicians.</start_of_turn
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May be if anyone says they are truncated, then restore those, and soak those thus as well as I do and recommend to you in the restoration of these things of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then pause the truncated finger steady according to the length of the finger, and make a little space around it; and leave the thumb as I have recommended, and strengthen that which is below the stricture downward.</end_of_turn>
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May be if these that are truncated of the bones are two or three or more, then pause over each finger the amount of its wrapped soft tissue, and strengthen the thumb at the base of the foot, and be standing on one of the heads of the thumb to keep the foot well retained.</end_of_turn>
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you to know that you must not omit any of the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and take heed of every accident like this which covers.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn>
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the bone of the thigh and of the fibula bone and of the heel bone.</end_of_turn
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the thigh is truncated, then cease that which is falling downwards, and incline that towards the side of two a little, and keep it stretched from behind.</end_of_turn
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And put the mattress full under the thigh bone, and make points in the thigh bone thus as well as you hope; and keep the foot well-circulated, and elevate the two little ones little by little, until all that is outside is contained until the truncated bone returns to its place.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And pause powders over the two little ones, and when you are going to urinate lean the thigh bone easily and gently, and reduce and return that as it is customary for this, and then return the powder first.</end_of_turn
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or so, until that which is restored.</end_of_turn
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take once of vinegar and strengthen over the wound of them a tube of sponge; and pour all the vinegar into the thigh bone, and keep blowing in the tube until the vinegar is inflamed within that the fracture returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And keep full of cushion and stay until the patient has recovered as we have recommended, until he is healed.</end_of_turn>
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the fibula bone of the foot or of the thigh is truncated, then administer in the restoration and agility of them what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.</end_of_turn
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is broken is not hidden in these primary fractures and that little debt, mainly to whom each one studies and uses understands this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest possibilities of recovery in the restoration and stiffness of them, and therefore understand well.</end_of_turn
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the heel bone when it is truncated, take vinegar and put the heel bone in that; and pause over it the covering of silk, and be covered, and keep it bound for three days or so, and be healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bones when it is almost healed.</end_of_turn
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in that in which the fracture has occurred almost healed, especially if the bone is great as for example the bone of the thigh or the bone of the hip, or similar to this, that you keep and strengthen that which is so much as to make it flexible if the conditions of inflammation allow or if the testifiers tell you so.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound heals, then cover that you keep to the retention of them what you powder over them when it is torn, if for another reason it does not exist.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And start to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong that, if not another accident occurs.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if another accident occurs suddenly, then leave the restoration of them until the swelling has gone down, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause other accidents.</end_of_turn
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the socket, cover that you make a hole to reduce that and to equalize that with your hands more easily and with less extension.</end_of_turn
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not to your preparation and the equilibrium of them with the thighs is greater, then you reduce that with your hands more easily like this; and that is the torment which is made of iron, the length of which is of seven words or eight and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary for the doctor to be aware of these three or four according to the quantity that you indicate for the care of all kinds of fracture.</end_of_turn
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	The patient should be made as comfortable as possible without causing excessive pressure on the area being treated during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	The pain is sudden and severe at the extremities, and the patient's skin should be relaxed and kept taut around the area affected
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the way to do it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called “labra volentz atelarem” in Greek, so it is very rare indeed
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the acute elevation of the limb is covered over the prominence of the bone
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And put it into a groove until the bone returns, and keep it equal with any bandage.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore strive to make the limb of the fracture equal between them, and if the fractured limb is slight, do not take that for a sign of good acceptance, for the hour you must insert the limb of that bone until the instrument has power over what.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May it be that we cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, however, we must take away that which covers the incision from the physicians which we have said; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever manner you can
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove that which remains in the bone of asperities and small sores.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and the patient finds great pain, then know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you can to comfort the patient greatly
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When the restoration of the limb is finished, which you have made to the bone, and when the limb is immersed in black vinegar, properly if it is summer, and do not put pressure on the wound or any other cause where there is oil, for fear that it should cause swelling and corruption
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately after the restoration of the limb, administer sponges at the time of the meal to complement the restoration of the limb, and leave the wound uncovered except that you insert a drain with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the wound
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Take great care that you do not tear the wound at the fracture, for that would be harmful to the physicians, and would cause great suffering to the patient, or that there should be inflammation or decay or softening of the tissues, for that would be healing improperly.</start_of_turn>
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the stricture of the limb should be loose, soft, different from the stricture of other fractures.</start_of_turn>
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear that there may be other accidents on these limbs which we have recommended, and if there is pain in the area, then do not cover that area with sponges, but rather with a bandage of cloth in place of sponges and strengthen it with that.</start_of_turn
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a day or two has passed since the wound has begun to heal, that there should be swelling in it, then you should remove the dressing which you had placed over that with vinegar, and immediately administer calamine, which we know to be useful for healing wounds, as well as other ointments that are commonly used for wounds of this nature.</start_of_turn
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Advise the patient to rest and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and stopped, and that the limb be prepared in such a way that the swelling should be easily eliminated from the body.</start_of_turn
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days pass by and the wound is not consolidated or is not separated from the limb, then know that here we are dealing with setbacks of the small ones in order to cover up the wound.</start_of_turn
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And those setbacks which are separated remain and are extracted, those which are not separated adhere to the limb and cause pain, perforate me to order to insert them as it is possible.</start_of_turn
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if there should be black spots or swelling in the wound, this is a sign of gangrene or other kind of corruption and decomposition, and in that case you must immediately suspend any treatment that has been previously recommended for that.</start_of_turn
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when you see that the limb is bruised, take note of the limb just as well as the limb of the patient and the attendants, and that you do not presume that there is attraction of the limb, or the extraction of it which may result from the negligence of the physicians; leave that within the body until it is ready to fall out naturally, which will be in approximately xx days or .xxx; And treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Capital .xx.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motas veguadas occur in this nodule in the remnant of healing from a fracture, especially when it is near the joints, and is usually caused by it. And it often hinders the natural movement of the limb
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the nodule is new and administer in such medicines that have stopped this excessive bleeding, and see, and heart-beat, and swellings, and inflammation, and keep an eye on them; if you take some of these or all of them, and confirm that these stop bleeding, or are like glue, or are like vinegar, and rest them over the nodule to stop it, and tighten them around it for good support
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And read the evacuation that you do not remove that for days; and if necessary remove that and do it again, until the nodule is gone; or stretch over that layer of lead downwards, for lead has the property of healing everything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May be if the nodule is already hardened and stretched, and it is necessary to make an incision for the most important part of it, and cut that for the most solid part of it, and remove the tumor and the swelling, or break that which is like a clot within that until it is gone; and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxi.	Capital .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	From the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb is kept stiff and flexible not according to its natural movement.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of a bone is restored, and then the limb is kept stiff, the following are not useful except for certain causes: that the ligament and the tendon of the limb have become too taut; or that there is excessive stiffness of the ligaments so that the nutrition of the limb is prohibited from running through; or for excessive swelling; or for an abnormal movement that is not in its time; or for a deficiency of healing in the body of the patient and for weakness of the limb.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the care of this is to give food to the patient and make them drink while the healing is multiplied in them; give baths; and give ointment and let them know about it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And keep the foot still on the limb, so that the foot does not impede the limb from receiving nutrition, or continue to embrocate it with cold water until the nutrition returns to its natural position
Capitol .xxii.	Capital .xxii
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	From the care of fractured bones when they are restored tortuously and prevent their operation from them so that they do not cover them
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an accident occurs to the limb that has already healed, with respect to the restoration of the fracture, there is suspicion of the fractured bone and the nodule, and it is for this reason that fear is shown towards the limb, however, the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, since the limb does not cover what is said of that limb being new fractured
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, many fools of doctors and restorers have made this mistake which has caused great fear to the signal of which is mortal
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	However, if the fracture and the nodule are new, it is necessary to bathe them with cold water in which there are many softening herbs such as chamomile, gentian root, meadowsweet, and bittersweet thistle; and that it be applied with plaster along with other plaster of Paris or with gypsum or olive oil, and be plastered over; or that it be given the treatment of gentian root and be bound with flaxseed or hempseed, and be similar to the medicines that are not foreign to consolidation
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And every day it is dissolved with prolonged rubbing that is gentle, and it is administered movement of the limb throughout the day in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	However, if the curvature has already gone down again and has become strong and hardened, it is necessary to take care of it with iron, for the cover that is left over of the fracture must be dissolved, and it is indicated that the surplus of nodule from that middle be extracted from the bone that is underlying subtly, and that this be administered with ease in that which is requested and studied
Capitol .xxiii.	Capital .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of discourse of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the sudden displacement of any joint of the limb, because it is prohibited from movement, and is announced by the figure of the limb, and brings about the disease of pain and great lesions
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident occurs in some dislocation, it is necessary to do everything possible to reduce it, and do not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the limb is swollen and strong, and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, the doctor must cover the patient with a blanket of warmth, and immediately lay them inside until the afterbirth is complete; then moisten the limbs with warm water and oil, and reduce them with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all parts must be treated with the water from which the memory will remain in their place
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the heads of dislocation according to what is said before concerning fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower part
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the jawbone below.</start_of_turn>
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated are both mandibles if they are not held in place; and the dislocation of both is caused in two ways: that they are slightly displaced from their places due to little movement, or that they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are softened in the part of the joint until saliva comes out from the patient's mouth and that they do not want to be able to open their mouths, and that their tongues are wrapped in their words.</start_of_turn
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, the doctor should return it to its place by itself without causing further injury.</start_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and complicated, the doctor must immediately administer reduction of it diligently, and must not delay.</start_of_turn
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister must hold the patient's head, and the doctor puts their thumb of their right hand on the root of the dislocation of the jaw below the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that they put their two thumbs together inside, if the dislocation is on two sides, and that the other hands tell the patient to relax their jaws and loosen those that are clenched; and the doctor should gently grasp the jaw and bandage it until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, the doctor must administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until it is helpful to lighten the reduction of both and not to delay the reduction of both for too long, as we have said.</start_of_turn
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they have returned and are softened, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, the doctor should stop over those little hairs of wax around the area, and apply wax and oil with a soft sponge.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their two sides, with their head resting between two cushions, so that neither side is painful; and do not force them to swallow excessively; keep the patient's tongue moist with a sponge, until when the pains are subsided and the jaws are relaxed, the doctor can make them vomit.</start_of_turn
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And when it is administered with ease, and not disturbing the eating, drinking and talking of the patient, until the jaw is healed and restored.</start_of_turn
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not recover their original positions, the doctor must administer cold baths and vinegar, and is highly recommended to make the patient vomit, and is highly recommended to give the patient vinegar water.</start_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When this happens often, the doctor must know that it is in vain; and that the one from whom this happened will die in a few days.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.</start_of_turn
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.</start_of_turn
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not displaced from its lateral side due to its continuity with the feet; and some say that it is displaced towards the outside, and this is declared by the feeling.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient sits on their two feet and extends their arms.</start_of_turn
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And gently compress the area with your palm with great compression, so that it returns.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And pause over that plaster and powder and tighten that.</start_of_turn
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More often, the extremity that was previously held by the collarbone continues to be supported by it; it is not dislocated on any day; the doctor must reduce it and bandage it as we have said and as it is convenient for you.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then rest upon that swelling, sprinkle it with powder, extract it, and command the patient to remain calm and still until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this same treatment, if the limb is separated from the hip bone, reduce the extremity of the muscle.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxvi.	(The text provided ends abruptly without completing the sentence. The provided translation stops at the incomplete sentence.)</end_of_turn>
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which is one that it is dislocated from the part of the titillus to the part beyond.</end_of_turn
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from the part below the muscle, and that is urgent; it is not dislocated to the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the parts in front by the nerves.</end_of_turn
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most of all it is dislocated outwards beyond the titillus, especially in those in whom the flesh is little, it is readily dislocated; more so in those in whom there are many bones, it is ejected outwards with difficulty.</end_of_turn
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it is much more common for such accidents to occur to men by percussion or falling, and the muscle of them is loosened from its aponeurosis, and is cured as soon as it has already been dislocated.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore when you are certain that it has been dislocated, then proceed with the treatment.</end_of_turn
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of the muscle is when it is beyond the titillus; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, that you find among these different appearances; and you find at the head of the muscle a concavity towards the titillus as if there were a drop of blood, and to the patient it is not possible to reduce the hand to the hip without pain, or to make that movement at all.</end_of_turn
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the heel or the ankle, and you find it to be so by touch, do not be fooled.</end_of_turn
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation it is useful to reduce it as soon as possible when the patient is young.</end_of_turn
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the hand to the part below; and immediately place the toes under the titillus of the limb, and raise the joint with force at its hip, and the minister raises the hand and extends that as well; and immediately pause that so that it returns readily.</end_of_turn
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	More so, if even though it does not return, since the accident occurred, for several days, cover that the patient should be bathed in lukewarm water and be administered embrocation that softens and relaxes like if there were many grains of wheat, fennel, and chamomile in the water, and be administered.</end_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And immediately the patient should be placed supine on the thighs and be kept still from the titillus of the limb until the swelling subsides between elevation and traction, and the other minister holds the head of the patient, that it is not bruised to the parts below, and another minister has the head of the patient, that it is not bruised to the parts below, because both these things must return to the hip.</end_of_turn
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: that you find a man who is longer than the patient and who is on that side, and enter the thigh muscle beyond the titillus of the patient and elevate the titillus to the parts below until the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below the belly.</end_of_turn
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	More so, if the patient is feverish, cover him so that no other cause is suspended, so that it is known that the dislocation has returned.</end_of_turn
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced quite simply in another manner: and that is that it is placed on the ground a staff as long as the head of the patient, which is rounded like a mortar pestle, which is neither thick nor thin, and immediately put the hand of the patient at rest; because so it is supported by the head of the staff, the patient is placed according to the length of the staff, and the hand is extended to the parts below of the other side; and the body is extended from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to the hip with speed.</end_of_turn
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult for all the causes that we have said, then use this treatment: take a staff the length of two cubits, and the width of four fingers, and the thickness of it should be flattened on the surface of the tibia in this way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And nearby on the round head they place lions' mane for so that it does not damage the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And nearby they support the patient's genitals, and extend the hand or arm over the belly towards the thighs, and bind the belly over the assistants and the arms and the hand extremity.</end_of_turn>
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And nearby support the arms on a stool as wide as necessary, and extend the hand towards the thighs, and the other limb is suspended from the other side, so that the joint is inside.</end_of_turn>
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the intestines are complete according to any method that you consider, and when you have covered that you pause the genitals expect for a quantity of lanolin; and nearby put on a plaster of pounded pumice and album of alum on all the muscles, even if it is rotated downwards, and nearby tighten the genitals with stricture downwards; and the ligament is rotated over the plaster, and the hand is attached to the hip, and is laid flat, and do not touch the hand for seven days.</end_of_turn>
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And cover that the patient does not eat much, until the limb is comforted, for it is more likely to recover quickly.</end_of_turn>
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And nearby the food is given more than seven or eight times or is practiced a movement; and therefore if it is stopped and is not softened, the hour is already healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	More importantly if the joint is displaced slightly by moisture that happens to it or for another cause, the hour covers that a cautery is administered with three incisions, as it is said in the chapter of cautery.</end_of_turn
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament is loosened and the joint is not stopped, and the plaster and the stricture are reduced over it somewhat softened, and it is not stopped and is cathed and cannot raise the limb above its thighs, the hour knows that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either insensitive or extended or softened, and knows that the joint will never be fixed in place again.</end_of_turn
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is useful for you must take the foot and the heel or the buttocks, the reduction is useful with impulse and extension with the greatest, until it returns.</end_of_turn>
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it is administered in another stricture, and care that it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens nearby the healing of the gravity in the limb and the delay in the movement of it, the hour recommends using a wet dressing until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the care of dislocation of the ankle.</end_of_turn
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the ankle joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and that which is dislocated throughout is most of all at the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you that it is caused either from leaving it relaxed or from touching it according to whatever figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the ankle dislocation from the socket, which is to say that you make the dislocation manifest, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the limb, nor touch any of the muscles.</end_of_turn
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover the ankle, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible until it returns to its place naturally, for if you see it naturally in the cautery, it is difficult for the reduction to take place, and it is not completely healed of all; and most of all when it is at the back, for it is worse of all other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many veins must be ligated at that time.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand is extended with two hands, and the arms are expanded, and the master's hands are over the ankle and hold it, and the plaster is put on the joint with the nails of the master together, or with the heel of the palm within that it returns to its place.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	More importantly if the dislocation is at the front, the hour returns just as it bends the hand with its hand, until it pierces the ankle at the heel of the palm.</end_of_turn
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, the hour administers violent extension and force.</end_of_turn
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that two assistants extend the arms, and hold that support two assistants so that it is not left behind due to the extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And nearby rotate the arms throughout, because it is enveloped with a fold of skin long over the hand, or ligament.</end_of_turn
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that those things which cause lubrication of the joint are facilitated; and then he should gently push the joint inwards until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then he should reduce the swelling by covering it with a paste which is stiff and viscous due to the addition of alum, and which should be extracted with great care, and the arm should be suspended from the shoulder and allowed to rest for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And so if the joint is formed in the heel, then you should dissect the ligament of the heel and leave it like that.</start_of_turn>
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint is not to be straightened, then you should repeat the packing and the ligament, and leave it like that for a few days until it is extracted; and then dissect that.</start_of_turn>
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	More if by chance the gravity should happen close to the reduction of the joint, and the situation is in movement, then administer oil in bath and subtle friction, and understand, until it is relieved; or rest over the joint relieved, so that there is no fatty movement; and then tie it up and leave it like that during the day and night.</start_of_turn
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And so on, put that in the bath; and when it has swollen, then gently massage the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat that once, twice, and three times.</start_of_turn
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already reached the innermost parts of the body, within which it is limited.</end_of_turn>
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, rest over that wound of the moist cow and scald it around the border and above that; and do a few times, because that which is moist reduces to its situation.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the care of dislocation of the limb, that is between the arm and the hand.</start_of_turn
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The limb of the hand many times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is light, which is different from the rest of the joints, however it must be speed in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, since the limb is inflamed or that it happens in it inflamed caut.</start_of_turn
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the thumb of the patient on a table and extend the hand of that, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the imminent of the joint, and gently pushes that until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However it must be considered if the palm already rests on the belly of the hand, then the patient should place two of his hands on a table beside the extension and the reduction; and if the dislocation is previous you should place two of his hands, then the position of the hand of that intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor rests on that imminent of the joint.</start_of_turn
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns whole, it is good; and if not, then gently stretch that with the paste giving up the swelling and leaving that; do not repeat that until pain or swelling comes over the reduction of it more than days pass.</start_of_turn
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However the joint remains according to its stiffness; and do not note to the patient any cause, but that the hand is softened and cannot stretch any cause; the hour is that the nerves are torn or broken, and that it is not caused by it but is stretched with a pointed cautery as in the case of it and is confirmed by what is conferred by any cause.</start_of_turn
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the limb is returned, then the doctor should pause over it the paste which has been recommended, and leave it and stretch it for five days; and then it should be dissected and left and the hand be exercised.</start_of_turn
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However if its movement is late and it happens to it any gravity, then the doctor should lengthen that with cold water and with some friction a few times, until it is relieved.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.</start_of_turn
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the care of dislocation of the fingers.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some times the fingers are dislocated throughout.</start_of_turn
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated at two of the palm or at the belly of it, then the doctor should stretch the finger and push out the dislocation with his thumbs until it returns.</start_of_turn
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend that beyond the part from which it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.</start_of_turn
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And immediately suspend that limb and extend the other until it is equal in that limb on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night falls, keep the other limb as before according to the story, and do not stop loosening that one in the day and exercising with movement, and keep that one in the night; and do this for several days until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with that which is dislocated at the wrist, and keep that limb at that part and do the first operation there, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same with that which is dislocated in other parts.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxx.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Concerning the treatment of dislocations of the bones of the two knees.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to any of the bones of the two knees or the ankle dislocation is complete, and so much mobility of the bones is lost in those places that treatment is not useful, for death is concealed by the illness.</end_of_turn
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the evacuation of the illness is outside the will, and cannot be retained; and moist people make it softer to some parts of their body or two veins of their body, or two ribs of their body, or one of those; or if one of those bones is remauged, which is not remauged, and moist people make it softer to remove those four parts.</end_of_turn
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that which is already remauged to the back is called swelling.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the treatment of them be that you consider if the swelling comes from pus, for in that case neither treatment nor healing will be of any use.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May I tell you what the Ancients said about the methods of treatment which are long, of which the greatest part returns with profit; but I have already abridged that which is less useful of the many, for my proximity to your understanding exposes me to that which I have explained and exposed from various instruments which I will show you and explain that one.</end_of_turn
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in swelling which arises from the front of the foot, neither bandage nor healing will take place of that; and in the same way in that which is caused by two fractures.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those only that which arises in the two knees properly in that which I recommend it.</end_of_turn
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the illness be extended over its face over the edge of the bed, and be extended so that it does not touch the feet of the body.</end_of_turn
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And immediately suspend that limb and extend the other until it is equal in that limb on that day.</end_of_turn
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister has the limb, and do not hold it in the fossa; and another minister has the other according to that form.</end_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And immediately cover over the head of the illness and leave only the toes uncovered; and extend the limb of the limb at the limb which is beside the head of the limb, and keep that one in it; and immediately strengthen the other ligament over the ankles of the limb and support the limb; and adjust all the ligaments and keep those in the other limb.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And immediately the minister grasp the limb and extend the ligament to the part of the limb, and do not leave the two limbs and the ligaments of the limbs in which they are fixed, but indeed do not stop them as we have said.</end_of_turn
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor puts his palms on the bone with strength until it returns, or that he puts them on a table, and immediately that he adjusts over the table the feet of the patient until it returns.</end_of_turn
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, the doctor takes a table of which the width or length is in the air of three ribs, and cuts in the wall from which we have said that it is proper for the illness to be in a place where the limb of the table is between the limb of the table.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And immediately stop the major part of the table on the bone, and the doctor puts the feet of the patient on the other limb, and opens up until the bone is fractured and returns to its place.</end_of_turn
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, or turn around which is revolved with the hand; and that you stay on the ground with the head of the illness at the back of the limb two limbs, the length of which is of an arm, and put the head of the limb at the back of the limb outside two limbs; and that the length which is between each limb be a palm, and that already be made in each limb fractured in which it returns, and that no limb be fixed on the ground so that it is not crushed.</end_of_turn
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let a round flask be placed over the turn, and let it be rotated in the two grooves of the two flasks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of them is a groove in which the flask is formed, its length being equal to one palm from which it is rotated; and in the two other flasks it is similar to that.</end_of_turn>
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments that you have stretched on the patient's feet in the area where the head of the foot is, and the ligaments that you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the area where the feet are.)</end_of_turn>
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place every turn and let a minister hold the turn with his hand, and the doctor will grasp the spin according to what we have said.)</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	When the spin has been returned, and the limb has been grasped, then cover that you have placed outside with a sponge of alum, and then stop; and place your hand over the outside of the sponge so that the intestine does not come out.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And so bind with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of nourishing food until he is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any swelling in the limb at the end of the healing, then cover that you should administer medicines that soften and soothe with the administration of alum, which we have recommended; and it is administered in that limb when there is a wound of lead.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Every wound of imminent swelling at the rear of the spines of both is cured by that dislocation; and that is the bone which has already been mentioned because it does not cause any harmful consequence to it with this medicine, for its force will do you no good but to make you die.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXVI.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated ankle.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not suffer only dislocation, but that it does not happen to them except for dislocation alone, and not to the other joints of the little toe which have recession and concavity.</end_of_turn
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, which is dislocated at the front, or at the back, or at the side, or at the heel.</end_of_turn
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated at the front, and little at the side or at the heel.</end_of_turn
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation at the front is that when you adjust the limb of the healthy patient with the limb of the patient, the thumb is longer and more prominent than the healthy one, the limb cannot bend the knee over the ankle, and the limb is bent over the heel as soon as it is placed on the cushion, so that the head of the bone has already passed over here.</end_of_turn
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation at the back is that these are counter to this accident.</end_of_turn
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation at the side is that the limb expands its heel according to custom, but however it does not bend the ankle where it hurts, and if you force it to go forward it cannot go over that which is painful; and the urine is retained and the swelling is postpartum, and you must walk the limb over the heel.</end_of_turn
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation at the heel is that it does not expand the ankle, nor does it allow bending that ankle which bends the swelling, and the limb is shorter than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the bone is over that place.</end_of_turn
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	More reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, when the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already ancient since you have not given it that treatment; for in that treatment there is no efficacy at all; and therefore you must not consider that there is any harmful consequence from it.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	More in that one in which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, you must keep the limb still so that you can return the joint and extend it at the front and at the back, and rather at the right and left, for its force will return and will not require any other treatment.</end_of_turn
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	More, if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare strong ministers and extend the limb of the patient from the lower part, or from the thighs, or from the ligament which is bound over the limb under the ankle; and another minister extends the hand of the patient with his thumb which rests on the tips of the toes; and hold tightly with a minister the heel of the limb, and have another minister hold the limb.</end_of_turn
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And reduce the swelling or blister to its concavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the swelling from bursting.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And extend all of those downwards until the patient is elevated to the height of the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four of them.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns to where we have said, it is good; but if not, it is necessary to perform all the means that we have mentioned for its proper care
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction itself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the ankles, cover that the patient is supine on the lateral side; and place your hand over the area between the head of the thigh and the area that is left to be supported; and extend the ligament from the part of the angulation to the higher part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister should strongly support the knees of the patient, and firmly grasp the large area of the painful thigh and extend outwards for violent extension, so that that which has returned to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this kind of treatment is lighter care than the one with which this limb is reduced than the others
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	More if you excuse yourself and do not obey the order with this kind of treatment, then cover that both feet of the patient are held together with a strong ligament, that is to say, over the ankle and over both toes and both ankles
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part is equal to the quantity of four fingers, and the painful limb should be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the head of the foot, and that should be in the major part; and the length of the limb from the ground should be equal to the quantity of two thighs
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a a strong young man to reduce the head of the thigh, and that should be suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man should support the thigh with force pushing, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction itself, when the dislocation is at the outward part, cover that the patient grasps over the heel as we have recommended in the treatise; and strengthen the ligament over the painful limb itself and over the feet of the patient
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two cushions should be placed, one under the foot and the other under the head; and two cushions adjusted to the middle of the limb that has been placed over which a damp cloth is covered, so that the patient is not dampened because the limb is between the patient’s thighs, for otherwise the extension towards the lower parts should not be violent.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with their hand grasps the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey diligently, it will be good very much; but if not, pause diligently and do as we have said in the treatise concerning that treatment
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	More cover that the patient grasps over the lateral sides of the thighs somewhat.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the ankle, cover that the limb should be extended gently, as we have mentioned in the treatise about the limb; and the doctor should place the palm of their right hand over the painful ankle, and with the other hand should hold that which has been held back, and in that holding pause that which was extended towards the lower parts towards the toe.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back, cover that the patient should not be extended towards the lower parts, but should be elevated above the ground; having covered that it should be held firmly, just as we have said if the ankle joint is dislocated outwards, as we have said of its position concerning two fingers; and it is about its face and the ligaments should be extended, as we have said, without any haste.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover that a bandage should be administered on the area around the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore when the reduction is accomplished as we have said — and the sign of the reduction of the limb is not concealed from you, that is to say that you extend two fingers of the patient, and when you have once again bound and the patient extends their limb and expands that excuse, you know that the limb has returned as we have said — and you adjust two cushions and hold tightly and extend with a bandage so that the ankle is not bruised in any part; and keep the patient still for three days or four
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And remove the ligament and the bandage, and compare one limb with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	The hour has come, if indeed those wasts in the garments have already settled down, that the dislocation has already ceased, and now let us leave the patient in peace.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if there is any cause of discomfort, then return and plaster that [joint] again, and extract that according to your first structure, and leave that for three days.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that [bandage], and make the patient walk slowly for a few days until comfort is restored.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxii.	[End of text]</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.</end_of_turn>
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways: when it is displaced outwards, inwards, or downwards; but not upwards.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that the patient applies pressure to the area with their hand; when the ankle is actually dislocated.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these positions is that you make the patient move their limb freely, except that you hold the limb firmly in place if necessary; bind two fingers to the face of the limb, and place the foot of the limb between the thighs; and further bind the ankle of the limb to the palms of your hands, and keep those bound over the ankle for strength, and another servant shall extend the foot until the ankle returns to its place.</end_of_turn
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is when the limb adheres to the area without pain and without limping.</end_of_turn
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that [joint] and bind the limb to the area, and leave them bound together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove them.</end_of_turn
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.</end_of_turn
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Moreover, if the dislocation has been reduced by you, the hour must administer strong extension to the ligaments which preceded the narration in the treatment of the thigh.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.</end_of_turn
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle has several veins which are slightly dislocated for a small removal, and some veins are displaced according to custom, and the dislocation is caused either by the outwards or inwards parts.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells from the part from which it is displaced.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for displacement is gentle restoration, and that it is easily extended with the greatest ease and is quickly healed.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of dislocation according to custom, you must make the patient move their limb freely, and hold that limb firmly in place with force from behind the two fingers of that which are in the middle of the limb.</end_of_turn
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And put your right hand on the heel of the foot and your left hand on the front part of the foot in the place of the ankle.</end_of_turn
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and push with your left for two veins, and extend with your left; and hold the foot firmly with your right hand at the base of the bandage.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that for two veins as we have counted.</end_of_turn
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And hold the foot to the bandage for the third vein, and you are at the ankle.</end_of_turn
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one vein or two according to this manner, and if sometimes the foot swells, that is good; but if not, the hour must repeat the operation until it returns.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Moreover, if the reduction is prohibited for you in this way, the hour must make the patient lie on their side on the ground, and elevate a little piece of soft material under the foot, and hold them between the patient’s thighs, and you have already bound around the limb with a bandage so that the patient does not injure themselves.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the other servant must hold the patient’s thighs, and another servant must extend the foot with their hands or with the ligaments that lie on the ankle of the foot; and extend whichever minister you like against the extension of the limb, and the piece of soft material should remain between the patient’s thighs to prevent the limb from being pulled outwards from its extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The doctor grasps the dislocation at the hip joint, while another assistant holds the sound limb away from the painful area, so that the dislocation can be reduced with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, when the dislocation has been reduced and you have declared its soundness, then cease the plaster and gently stretch that which was strongly bent, and unite the limb to the limb that was flexed.</end_of_turn>
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And take care that you fear or guard the nerves that lie behind the heel, so that the ligament above that should not be tight and the other should be gentle.</end_of_turn>
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then rest for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, remove it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the fourth day or the fifth, remove it and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May be it is necessary to go forward despite this space, but it is not in vain that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and take what does not receive care.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if by chance the patient has a relapse of the gout, cover that you administer in the cessation of the disease whatever is before our narration, in other places of care and embrocation, until it has been rectified.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the bones of the foot.</end_of_turn>
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Take that which is dislocated and grasp it slightly without excessive tension; and what is not difficult, abstain from it.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the heel bone of the two feet, then cover that the patient should sit down on the soft earth or on a table, and be as if he were going.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And place your foot on the ground, and pause the limb over what you see of the joints, and prevent that limb from bending until it returns, and that you see that it is already healed and does not reappear in the vicinity.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place under the foot of the patient a board that covers the whole foot, to which are attached two heads, and strengthen that which is stretched downwards and closed for three days; and then remove that and make the patient walk for a month, until it is healed and the restoration is assured.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.</end_of_turn
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the varieties of dislocations that are caused by swelling or fracture or any other lesion.</end>
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are dealing with the treatment of that and the restoration of it, many things are seen that cause death.</end_of_turn
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason we do not cover that you should presume about the treatment of that and its restoration, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, punctual, not arrogant or presumptuous; and that he should use in the beginning of medicines that do not cause relapse so only, and read the patient to the divine judgment, rather than to that to which you hope for health from the loss, from the alleviation of the disease, and in which there appears any hope.</end_of_turn
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so strive so much to make the reduction in the beginning of the disease, preventing relapse at all costs.</end_of_turn
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And so if the limb returns as we want, then administer a regimen that relieves the pain that accompanies the swelling and dries up the moisture.</end_of_turn
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is in a fractured bone and the fragments are separated, then you must pierce the membrane of the bones, and do as we have said in the simple diseases of what is before said concerning them.</end_of_turn
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And keep and avoid as you are able the harmful things that you are commanded by your fear according to my prediction; for what is better for you than to have recourse to your Creator, and may it remain to your glory, and may it be more profitable to you in the end.</end_of_turn>
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly praising God from whom no blessing is withheld.</end_of_turn
Amen.	Amen.</start_of_turn>
