Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O offspring, know that I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the praise of it, and for the praise of its practices, and for the pronouncements of its author, it is because I wish to instruct you in this book that which is part of my art, that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery is very rare in our region and in our time, so that it is a thing that is almost lost; and its knowledge is very little, and the greatest part of it has perished; and it remains only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change most of all and bring about those errors and hesitations that exist until their causes are understood and the force and the art are prolonged
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen by me that I have composed this treatise in such a way as to follow the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and that it should be added to the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the work, as well as for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause why no good artist is found in this our time for the surgery of the hand is that the art of medicine is long, and that it covers many actors who have not been exercised in the science of anatomy, who do not know the bones, the nerves, and the lacerations, and the number of them, and their structure; and the knowledge of the veins and arteries, and the places of their origin and termination.</start_turn>
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And thus says Hippocrates that I have no name, but in the small work more than in the great work, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And indeed we have already said in the introduction of this book that whoever is not learned in anatomy is not worthy of being called a physician, for they will cause the death of many men, as I have seen in many instances, for many of them are formed in this science and depart from this science and its experiments.</start_turn
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inept physician who has incised a scrofula on the heel of a woman, and has ligated some arteries of the heel so that there flowed great blood within her, and the woman died between her thighs.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another physician who thought he could pull out a stone from a man’s belly which had been there for a long time, and the stone was large, and he came to take it out with a hook, and the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already mentioned this, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knew that he would die
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another physician who took charge of surgery for a duke from our land, and he entrusted him with a black slave who was his servant; and the physician, in his ignorance, opened the fracture, over the wound, with sponges and sticks of great strength, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And thus I forbade him according to his desires, and I released him, and I commanded that he should be relieved for a few days and be given rest; and this happened until the wound burst out, and he perished
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I went to see him, and I saw that I had to take away the ligature, and there was peace and an end to the pain.</start_turn><end_turn>
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption was already confirmed in the limb, for I could not restrain that, and I did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another physician who perforated an abscess of cancer, and it bled profusely from the beginning, until the malignancy of it grew greater than that of the master of the house
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that cancer is pure melancholic humor, and that it does not suffice to remove it from the limb in which it has settled, but that it must be treated in the limb in which it is to be found.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And thus, offspring, it is necessary for you that the surgery of the hand be divided into two parts: that is, in surgery which is associated with health, and in work which is perilous in the greatest precautions
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already spoken of this in all places of this book in which I have mentioned surgery in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to retain this and to leave that, so that the fools do not find fault with you and you do not become discouraged.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take the rest of the arms in the request and in the protection of God, and the rest of the diseases in the facility and in the firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	E use the way of the Lord in grace, and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the grievous diseases of difficult healing, and finally the other weapons of that which you fear, so that your salvation may rest in your faith and in your name: for may your might remain to your glory, and above all in heaven and behind the saints.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed, I have already mentioned several times in various discourses:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“There is no medicine for a bad disease, so that no doctor will be called by that name”.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already discussed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the parts of the foot, in the forms of instruments and the utensils of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second part
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with swelling and perforation, and of blisters, and of wounds, and of the extraction of arrows and similar to those, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, and with the care of fractures and similar to those; the chapter is categorized from the head to the foot, and by the forms of the instruments
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery and acute medicine and reminder of the operation
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that in which the treatise of all the book begins
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	So I say what is the quality of the instruments of that cautery and of their documents, and in what combination it is prohibited to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the cautery instruments and their documents is a long and elaborate one, and subtle for science, and a secret hidden; and already many savants have spoken greatly of it, and they have disagreed with each other, and to me it seems that a small part of their speeches is sufficient, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that cautery is permissible in all its universality with regard to its matter or its matter, except for two qualifications, which are qualifications that refer to its matter
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the cold and dry matter there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is useful for that, while others say that it is harmful for that, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the disease be cold and dry along with that which is being cauterized and dried.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite, that by cautery is useful for any cold and dry disease that is in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with the humidity of his body with the quality of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say concerning this speech that I have already experimented with it several times and discovered it
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not say that everything that is said above is to be taken for granted; for it is necessary to know the practice of cautery after exercise, and to be acquainted with the diversity of the qualities of men and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the time space of those
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other qualifications, it is not about you to fear, and especially in cold and humid diseases, for already all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the usefulness of cautery in those
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of curing with fire cautery is not in the power of fire, but in the gentleness of fire, for the action of the fire does not reach beyond the part which is cauterized and does not touch anything else except for the small document.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And the action of external medicine reaches only to that part of the limb from which it is applied, and it makes it strong for the diseased part of the limb of difficult healing and makes it strong to leave
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, for its smallness and for its gentleness, does nothing other than what we already know by experience and by the length of our studies concerning the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused for the length of this speech, for it is not fitting for me to reveal this secret of yours concerning fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and the safety of its expulsion for which it expels diseases, as a philosophical demonstration, which would be acute in the remaining passages.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	The best translation is:
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is suitable at all times, for thus it does not harm the time of the accident when it is immersed in the benefit of water that makes the cautery more painful, especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer from delay, for it is feared that those that come late will bring malice, which is greater than the slight discomfort of coming at the right time.</end_of_turn>
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	I do not deny, friends, that sometimes the people of the vulgar sort, or rather the fools of the doctors, do not esteem anything except for the common people and the poor peasants. So it is with that disease which is cured by cautery, for it is not ridiculous at all times, and one should stop at that consequence.</end_of_turn>
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not that they give it for water, for cautery is nothing but a medicine that alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of pain.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Moreover, cautery surpasses medicine for the delight of its value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of the Lord's mercy.</end_of_turn>
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease will return at any time of life, according to the composition of the disease and the location of the disease, and the virtue of the treatments, and what is prepared in the body from the abundance of humors in the body, and what is brought to the body in food and drink, and from those causes; but when the disease is treated with cautery, it is a subtle disease in a few superfluous humors and moisture, just as if it were cautery for toothache.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Therefore it is better to speak vulgarly that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and is a speech of great prudence, not as those understand it who do not know it, for they believe that it is not a cure that uses either medicine or any other cause except for cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	On the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is true only when the methods of treatment of certain diseases are administered, and those medicines do not suffice, and when the cause is in some way overcome, it is appropriate to administer cautery, and to take advantage of that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And thus it is clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the vulgar people and the fools of the doctors have of it.</end_of_turn>
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients say that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and I do not say anything else except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.</end_of_turn>
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	I say that the place of cautery does not make it harmful, as some falsely believe, for I have already seen that it does no harm to any limb except for the other, and that cautery with gold is better than that with iron; however, when you make cautery with fire from gold, you must take care that the fire is not too strong, for if you adjust too much fuel to the fire, the gold will burn for the fire; and if you take away some of the fuel, the operator will burn his hands for lack of fuel.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, when you make cautery with iron you must place it more gently and more cautiously on the rectitude of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those that are between the feet so that I may satisfy the request of those who demand it of me.</end_of_turn>
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for the headache from cold and moisture.</end_of_turn
Le capitol primier.	Chapter one.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers relief from cold and moisture concerning the accidental cause of the which two causes, so is the cause of soda and the multitude of rheumatic fluxes, swelling of the marrow, of the head to the limbs of the heels and the flowing urine, and the multitude of sleep, and toothache and gut pain, and universally of all diseases that arise from cold, even as paralysis, suffocation and apoplexy, and is similar in those diseases.</end_of_turn
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first command the patient to evacuate with laxatives for three or four nights, according to the excess of the virtue of the disease and the age and custom of the patient.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then do that which must be done between your thighs on a fallen bench and that you place your hands on your feet.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then hold the razor of your palm near the root of the nose between the toes of your feet.</end_of_turn
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	May be, since the sick person has mentioned the area of the ankle is affected, the sign of the ankle is that the fire is there: and immediately ignite the olive oil of which this is the shape.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And immediately stop that over the area that is affected, in such a way that it slowly descends, and your hand is slightly constricted, and you will rotate that
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And immediately lift your hand slightly and support the area, and if you see that already some quantity of the head of the bone is exposed, as much as the quantity of barley grains, then elevate your hand, and if you do not turn your hand away from that side, from the other side, if it is cooled down, enter until you see that amount of bone that I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And immediately take a little of salt and dissolve it over the area and let it stay for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And immediately stop over the knee bent in the border and let it stay until the burn of the fire is destroyed
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And immediately apply the four remedies to the area until it is healed
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And indeed when the plague remains open, better take off the sleeve, for it is better and more useful
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I say to you all that the heel must be cauterized until the bone, and must be held cauterized until every part of the substance of the bone is consumed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And immediately both that which is pressed against the bone and that which is cured
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And I say to you that it must be cauterized behind, until it almost reaches the bone, so that when it is pressed against the bone it makes the bone strong, and this is the way of making an incision that is not too deep.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And it is estimated that from that area the vapor of the head escapes.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the plague remains open for a long time, and finally it is cured, it must be consolidated
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two ways of cauterizing in all my life, but in some men for fear; and leave that, you must know, is better for health than to cause the head to be swollen by continuous application, just as we have testified in other members, and even more so when the head of the patient is of a cold nature
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first way of cauterizing is better and more useful, you must know; and from that one I have seen better results in this work than from this one.
Capitol segon.	End of text.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs and the disease is prolonged, and you use herbs and poultices and compresses and patches and sponges and garlic and onions and vinegar and mustard, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that reports and does not benefit from any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the disease is of strong constitution in its nature; and that it is not cold and finds no great heat, then you should cauterize with another cautery leaving a little space between them.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And immediately cauterize over the heel of the foot until the bone is fractured
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and uncover from the bone the quantity that we have recounted and cauterize that which is in the lower part of the head in the area where the veins are closed, — and that is the place where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And withdraw your hand quickly in support, and do not uncover the bone, for the disease by that will find great pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I say this cautery in this place, because it covers that which must be cauterized with the one which has already been cauterized, that is the corn of the head and the occipital bone is more subtle a cauterize than that which is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the way of doing it
Capitol ters.	End of text
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization of an ancient hernia.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When inside the head there is soft pain, or is prolonged pain in the groin, evacuate immediately with medicines that strengthen the head, and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the conditions of diseases; and if that does not help, then the cauterization of the area is in two ways: either with acute medicine that burns, or with a needle
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Better is the cauterization with acute medicine than that with alcohol, for you take a spoonful of vinegar and expel that and remove the extremities of it from both heads
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And thus strike the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet that is in the area of the pain itself, so that the cordene is not visible.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And keep pressure on it for a while to constrict, and leave it for three hours; then remove the ligature and take away the dressing, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and keep your hand over it until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And care for that which is engorged until it is healed
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, know that there are many medicines that combat these which I have written in the previous treatise on medicines that combat them
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be done with iron in this manner: fire for the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and is called closed clamps, which has a head like a nail in which there is a small prominence in the middle.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And keep your hand over the area of the pain, and hold your hand – that the dressing is not torn which is left – and slowly rotate the iron little by little with speed
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the specification of the cordene is as much as most of it, elevate your hand so that the artery is not torn which is left, so that there is no flow of blood
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immerse the wound in salt water and leave it on the area for three days; then cover the area with a dressing and care for it until it is healed
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the cuticle according to the incision, and keep the incision of the artery in this outward movement properly not antiquated.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery of the inward movement of the artery
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you have cured the artery according to what has been said of the previous treatment and what has been said in the divisions of the diseases, and you do not profit from the treatment, and sometimes for the disease that does not suffice for it as much as the first treatment with medicine or the cautery with fire, then know that you must ignite the cautery of the nail until it is white, for it signifies that over the area of the pain along the line of length of which is the greatest part of the finger, or whatever; and withdraw your hand for a while and hold it until you have inciscated the artery and arrived at the bone
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However necessary is that you guard the continuity of the mandible, which is praised for chewing, and that the nerve not be torn and that the muscles not be damaged, and that no spasm occur
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood of the artery that is being cauterized, because in the cautery of it there is fear, and especially for that one who ignores what is done and is not studied and is reckless; leave the operation to the beginning
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to remind you of the regimen of the flow of blood concerning the accident of the artery according to its custom
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not benefit from this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and care for the wound until it is healed
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of the stretching of the artery with two clamps, and this is better cautery and more reliable
Capitol .v.	Chapter five
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery of the pains of the heel
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the heel there is pain from cold and is cured by means of lacatives and by the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then know that you must ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has no point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And strike the point near the ignition, and be careful around the whole heel as if it were rotating, or around the circumference of any abscess if the pain is in any place
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with you the cautery of the root of the heel little by little because you have seen that you have marked the area with the finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you have made ten points all around the heel, and what is that, and care for the wounds until they are healed
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six
De cauterizacio de turtura.	From cautery of the torus.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torus which is cured by cautery is not anything other than the species which cause inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.</end_of_turn>
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the species which must be dried or whose nerves are spastic.</end_of_turn>
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured that species of torus, immerse the limb in hot water and cover it with oil, and keep it warm, without removing the dressing, until you have cauterized with three cautery instruments: the first you must touch the root of the nail, the second a little beyond the nail, and the third at the junction of the two lips.</end_of_turn
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And keep the cautery away from the opposite side of the painful area, because mollification does not take effect except in the part where the pain is healed.</end_of_turn
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the manner of cautery is that you cauterize that which is black in the root of the nail while you hold a little over the head of the toe, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the finger without going beyond. Stop your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the matter of the species of the code has been consumed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of cautery, and it is the species of the cautery, the form of which is like a knife with a flat blade.</end_of_turn
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More subtle is that one which a little always sees; and cover in it of excessive thickness a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And keep the area around the limb in water which is like a bath until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vii.	End of text.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	From cautery of ancient apoplexy.</end_of_turn>
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexia is ancient and you have cured that which we have said, and do not fear your medicine and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cautery instruments: over all the nails of the foot; and in the head of the foot as we have said; and in the heel.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is sufficient as we have said.</end_of_turn
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is better delayed; and keep it cured with water which proceeds.</end_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	End of text.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	From cautery for temporary forgetfulness caused by inflammation.</end_of_turn
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Keep the patient calm in the beginning with large doses and give him pills that serve to moderate.</end_of_turn
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And keep the patient's head all around the patient and stop their teeth from biting them in the area described in the treatise on dressings.</end_of_turn
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And stop any herbs, because that is the manner of cautery.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do the water according to that method or which I have already said.</end_of_turn
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if for those who are well it is good; and if not, then do three cauteries in the back part of the foot, which depend on the part most superior of the head until the part most distant from the heel.</end_of_turn
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And stop between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and keep the cautery warm with the water which proceeds.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	More if you are addicted and the patient is tolerant, then do the cautery in the middle of the foot; and if you want more addiction, then cauterize that over the two nails.</end_of_turn
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Keep the area around the limb until it is healed; and the cautery olive oil according to the manner described before.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ix.	End of text.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	From cautery of nails and mollification of the whole body.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Keep the process of calming the head with warmth and water as we have said; and keep the patient's head close to the patient, and cauterize that in the middle of the foot, and over all the nails of the foot, and over the back part of the limb, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the heel.</end_of_turn
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of the mollification of the body of the tropics that this one and the other patients are tolerant and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the buttocks, and then keep it cauterized until it is consumed by the matter of the code.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Capitol .x.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Capitol .xi.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and great heat, then cauterize that which we have said should be cauterized while maintaining paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive humidity declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what modifies the head of the patient as we have dictated in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Capitol .xii.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are told at the beginning of the water in the heel for the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water which modifies the head of the patient, and keep that away from all humidity
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And thus treat the patient who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard yourself from the flow of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see that there is still blood flowing, stop any medicine that you may have given.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I would add that you must have knowledge of the extraction of arteries and the excision of those, as well as being careful of the flow of blood.</start_of_turn>
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And each vein is cauterized at the cervix leaving two bones between two cauteries that are produced immediately.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cautery of ancient tears.</start_of_turn
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are ancient, and are collected by the veins and arteries that are in the area of the forehead and it is verified that these are superfluous fatty phlegmas, then cauterize the one that we have recounted in the chapter on the commencement of water, and at the middle of the head and at two points in the cervix leaving two temples, and at two points in the cervix leaving two bones.</start_of_turn
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you are doubtful, then cauterize that which is throughout the breadth of the cheek over the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery of the smell of the nose.</start_of_turn
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your physicians have done what we have said in the division and do not profit from your medicine, then you shall appear and give to the patient to drink for three nights; and then cleanse his head and cauterize the middle with the olive oil.</start_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And cauterize that which is cauterized with the clove with two cauteries over the two eyebrows leaving the hair a little.</start_of_turn
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard yourself from the burning that you do not burn that.</start_of_turn
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the clove cautery.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.</start_of_turn
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery of the softening of the eyelids of the eyes.</start_of_turn
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then you cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with a lunar shape; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize over the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries throughout, and they will be elongated from the temples.</start_of_turn
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.</start_of_turn
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.</start_of_turn
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eye when the pupil is converted into parts and the pupil is put out of the eye.</start_of_turn
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the pupils of the eye are converted into parts as soon as the pupil is put out of the eye, cauterize in those two ways, either by making or by medicine that burns.</start_of_turn
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, command the patient to drink while the pupils are reading those that move them, until they are prolonged and equal; and if you put out the eye, then strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not painful until the pupils are born.</start_of_turn
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When the pupils are born and equal, then you pause the head of the patient in the gut and approach again over the eye of the patient with your hand, with a signal that is according to the figure of the holly leaf, and that is the beginning of the signal at the edge of the pupil.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And approach slowly from behind with a bandage of wool or with mucus of fish over the eye.</start_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And approach quickly the cautery of which this is the form.</start_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And approach cauterizing over the figure that you have signaled, little by little, in burnt patches, until the surface of the bone that is just like a holly leaf is completely burned out, quite openly indeed.</start_of_turn
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of safety in your work is that you see the pupil of the eye already contracted and the eyelids elevated above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and place it there for three days, and keep your hand resting on the edge until the wound is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is swollen until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Maybe if it returns for any reason, then immediately remove the swelling and soften the pupil, for the hour will come again when you will make the puncture once more.</end_of_turn
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	Maybe if the swelling is in the pupil, then immediately cauterize that until it is raised to its natural level and is equalized, and that the pupil does not touch the eye again.</end_of_turn>
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Maybe the cautery will suffice for the medicine because you command the patient to rest the swelling until it is prolonged and equalized, and you will make the mark of the cautery in the form of a leaf of ivy.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take a piece of lint with a little bit of ointment and put it in the wound.</end_of_turn> namely.</end_of_turn> Or what you will, mix these things together, and make a fasting for so that it is not inflamed; and expand a little of that over the mark which is made like a leaf of ivy, and place that on the eye or both; and keep the eye covered in a bag of wine, and the head of the patient is in the thigh.</end_of_turn
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And keep saying about the medicine and give it a little bit and do not touch it until the patient feels the bitterness of the medicine, which is in them just like fire.</end_of_turn
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore when you perceive that the other bitterness has ceased, then read the medicine and do not touch it until I tell you that; when the bitterness has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and consider that sometimes the pupil is already raised just like after being washed over the constriction caused by fire or incision, for the hour this is good; and if it does not return from the medicine over the area where you did not imprint the medicine and it does not fall down until the operation is healed and the pupil is contracted.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And keep your hand resting on the edge until the swelling of the wound has disappeared, and take care of that which is swollen again until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to know that you must keep your eye on the eye so that no more medicine falls into it, and if the pupil is somewhat days softened by any cause of the swelling of the eye, then repeat your medicine over that area which was softened, just as you did at the beginning, and do not delay until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of a ivy leaf.</end_of_turn
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the humors of men are diverse according to their magnitude and their thinness, and therefore according to what is useful for your contraction.</end_of_turn>
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be ashamed of the way of proceeding in this art.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the lacrimal of the eye.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat the fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases and you do not confide your care, then you must know that you must cauterize that in the following manner: command the patient to keep their head down in the thigh, and hold the head of the patient by any minister between the thighs in such a manner that it is not stifled or shaken at the head of the patient.</end>
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And keep the eye covered in a bag of wine or in mucus on the eye of the patient.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And take the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is conquered, like the shape of a cane or of a pinwheel, from one extremity to the other where the cautery is to be made.</end_of_turn
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you will, penetrate through to the other extremity.</end_of_turn
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, you can also remove it like this.</start_of_turn
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is conquered is better for the work.</end_of_turn
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And immediately close the fistula if it is open, and bring healing to it and dry that.</end_of_turn
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not opened, then open that and extract the purulent discharge from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And hold your hand a little below the nose, so that your hand does not move or the patient becomes agitated, and when you have finished, remove the cautery from the wound and close it up with whatever is necessary.</end_of_turn>
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if at the beginning of the incision the bone has already entered, it is not good; but if not, repeat the incision once or twice, if necessary; and leave that for three days. And then place your hand over that area around the border and send it out dry until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	Even if it has been several days and it is not healed, then place over it corrosive acute medicine until the bone is uncovered and is as it should be according to what is said in the capital chapter.</end_of_turn>
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of cautering a fistula is as follows: enter the location of the fistula and make that opening and then place your hand in that rough cavernous space of which is the form of it: and put in that the quantity of the black pepper seeds that are found; and hold your hand firmly in place, so that the patient does not faint due to the smell of that; and cover the face of the patient with a cushion filled with hay or in water, so that the pepper seeds do not reach the nose of that.</end_of_turn
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what has been said of the cautery and the treatment, it is not good; but if not, it is necessary to administer medicine through the nose and reduce the fistula to the root of the nose according to what is appropriate in that location.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cautering of the wound it is said.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times accidental incisions occur in the lips, and more especially in the lips of children.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those incisions with what has been said in the divisions and do not neglect your treatment, then do the following:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the concavity of it according to the softness of the flesh.</end_of_turn
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And hold that firmly in those incisions until the cautery reaches the base of the incisions.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautering of fistula in the mouth.</end_of_turn
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is swelling and it is broken, and it is old, and there is a fistula, and you neglect the treatment, then cover that and do not neglect treatment. Then ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and put that flame in the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand over that until the flame reaches the root of it, and after that do it once or twice. And take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore, if the healing is abscesses and is healed, it is not good; but if not, it is necessary to uncover the location and host the corrupt bone according to what is appropriate in that chapter.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautering of the teeth and of softening of the arteries.</end_of_turn
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by humidity and the teeth are blackened, and you treat those with medicines and do not confer them, then place your hand over the patient's cheek in the neck and do the following: ignite the cautery in the shape that will come to you, and while you are holding that place your hand over the tooth so that the flame does not reach the root of the tooth being cauterized.</end_of_turn
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then take away your hand and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.</end_of_turn
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then rinse the patient's mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then remove it, because the blackened tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the humidity that was corrupted is dried up.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautering of toothache.</end_of_turn
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is cold or warm, or if you do not comply with the treatment with medicine, then the cautery is used in two ways: either at the edge of the cows or at the fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cautery is applied at the edge of the cows (lip of the tooth) or at the fire (hot iron).
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And thus repeat the process until the force of the fire reaches the root of the tooth
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the border of the tooth and place it over the painful tooth, and place your hand over the iron until the iron reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cautery with the iron is more dangerous than with the cows or the flame, for it must be observed when the air or the iron is too hot, and that in the belly of the patient there is any swelling or pain.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And thus remove the form which comes from the cautery, and place your hand over the tooth until the cautery is cool; and do whatever it takes for the pain to disappear, whether on that day or the next day or the day after
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And so it is commanded that the patient should fill his mouth with good butter for an hour and then remove it; and this is the way of the cautery
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you are able according to your means
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the way of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cautery of exostoses.</start_of_turn>
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When exostoses are of flexibility and cold humors and do not submit to digestion by medicines, then you must cauterize them slightly. For this purpose, hold two fingers closed so as to protect the surrounding parts from the fumes of the cautery, and place the ignited iron on the apex of the excrescence for a single herb, or two if you think it necessary, until the iron reaches the depth of the excrescence.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the excrescence is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the excrescence, and apply a compress for three days and place your hand over it covered with butter until it is consumed what the fire has burned
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care that the gum, the nails, and the clothes are not damaged until it is healed
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the way of the cannula or gives the cautery in this way.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery of the voice and the constriction of the throat
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity is over the root of the lung, and especially when it is of cold composition, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient with laxatives at the beginning of treatment, and then cauterize that which is under the edge of the epiglottis in the depressed area.</start_of_turn>
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care that you do not reach the epiglottis with the cautery or that you do not burn the cord of the voice, but only a little.</start_of_turn>
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that which is another cautery to be made at the junction of the cartilage of the collar with the last vertebra of the neck.</start_of_turn
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of the collarbone is carried out as before.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care that what precedes is done until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery of the pulmonary disease and cough
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and pulmonary disease are of cold humidity and the patient has neither fever nor chills and is an old disease, then cauterize twice on the furcula in the depressed areas of the lung and between two nipples; and make the cautery of the collarbone as before.</start_of_turn>
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make the punctures with the cautery that is called punctate, of the form which is described in the puncture of heel pain.</start_of_turn
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And do the punctures inside the cavity as well as outside; and take care that what precedes is done until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And thus the cautery should not have three ramps, for the cautery is at that point: one should make three cauteries in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	And thus the cautery should not have three ramps, for the cautery is at that point: one should make three cauteries in this way:
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	And thus the cautery should not have three ramps, for the cautery is at that point: one should make three cauteries in this way: from the cautery of the little toe which is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to greasy humidity and is not fixed at the time of the setting sun, you must return its dislocation until it returns by itself as it is commonly known. And thus by a slight movement it is displaced again as soon as it has gone, as we have testified. Therefore, when the dislocation first occurs, you must first reduce it, and then restore the patient either face down or on the side; and raise the heel which is in the groin of the little toe to the parts below, if the joint is dislocated downwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus the cautery should not have two heads; and this is the way to do it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And thus the cautery should not have two heads; and thus cauterize the heel until it penetrates the other side; and the figure of the cautery will be that of four heads of cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus according to the quantity of hair; and this is the way to do it
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And every fold is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And thus keep your hand over the cautery pores with salt, and make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for any time until it is comforted
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the lower parts and it is urgent, then cauterize over the muscle at the head of the cautery or with several pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol XXVVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moist humors in the stomach that cause swelling and multiply the worms in it, and if you continue your treatment methods and do not confirm them, then you must make the patient lie face down, extend their limbs and buttocks, and make three cauteries: one on the heel leaving the toes for the amount of a finger at the head of the cautery, and two on the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery is formed; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that will make the wound less painful.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the amount of two-thirds of the thickness of the heel
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is as follows: these are additional cauteries. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach as follows; and this is a circle cautery as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized point by point at that point where it is most sensitive. And you should mark on the stomach point by point according to the amount you wish on the hair, and then cauterize at those points; and take care of that which precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol XXVVII
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery of the painful heel
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the heel due to cold or moisture or for excessive wind, and the normal swelling of the limb is expelled by excessive discharge, and when the patient has been treated as we have said and has not recovered, then you must make the patient lie face down on their neck, and mark with three cauteries as follows and with this quantity above the heel beyond the hip bones, honing the heel of man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery is according to the thickness of the finger, and the cauteries are according to the length of the limb that is being treated
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not touch the patient with the cautery more than necessary
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of the liquid that is adhered to the quantity of the great toe of the foot, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then you must hold still, which has already extended their buttocks, and lift the thighs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the way of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you may also cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when it is in your wisdom and prudence in the art
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Keep the cautery moving steadily and do not linger too long in one place, so that the entire area of the body is cauterized and reaches the underlying tissue. Be aware that the codena here is subtle; take note of that.
Capitol .xxviii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	From perforation of the abscess of the foot with the cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When swelling or abscess in the foot occurs and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its membrane, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the pain is severe and the swelling is acute
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the foot, with great pain which often makes doctors despair of its cure
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore the patient should be placed in a sitting position; and gently touch the area of the abscess with the hand; and immediately cauterize with the cautery that is like a rag, as its form is described in the other book.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize until the entire body is cauterized, until it reaches the bone, until the ulcer has healed.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other abscesses until they have healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Do not use this method of cautery except for those that have been studied in the art of medicine, and in most of which numerous diseases are known; for in these cases it may cause more harm than benefit. However, in some cases it is necessary to perform this operation, even though we must read and heed the warnings that are given to us.
Capitol .xxix.	End of document.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterizing of the pleura.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	I say that the old cauteries of the roots of Aristotle towards the pleura are to be made according to this manner: take from the roots of Aristotle a long thin splinter that is found, and that is of the thickness of a finger
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immerse that in oil and burn that at the fire, and immediately cauterize at that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the ribs; and with two small cauteries leave guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is beyond the beard, and two cauteries in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the twelfth, declining slightly towards the back; and another cauterization in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations of the back parts; and one cauterization in that place which is between the two scapulae, and two cauterizations of the two sides of the foot, leaving the cauterization which is between two scapulae.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand over the cautery, but rather keep the manifestation of the body in work
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And I say that the old men say that they are the ones who use cautery like iron rays and fire, and that they put that in that place which is between the ribs, until that abscess is gone and is cured, as we have said in the abscess of the foot
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this perforation with the cautery there is no fear, for so many people have already died in that place that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	End of book.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the melsa
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of the melsa with what we have said of the care in the division, and do not entrust your care, then the cauterization in it is according to three methods, which are all safe, of which one is to make three or four lines according to the length of the melsa according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery let the thickness be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner that we have said in the cautery of the foot equally
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand over the cautery; and the patient should be even more about the two hips
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two lifters, which cause we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the limb which is at the end of the melsa so that it does not touch the belly of the patient on the left side
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	The elevation should be at the level of the hip bone according to the length of the limb, so that the cautery can be performed according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And now bring together the two veins, ignite one, in that part where they penetrate the hip bone from the other side
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and so there will be four cauteries in total
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize at the cautery that has three veins
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then keep the cautery still after it has bled for a while, because it is different from the other previous causes in treatment
Capitol .xxxi.	End of text.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The cautery does not burn in hydrops but in the substance itself
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you have cured the hydrops in the ways of treatment that we have said in the division and you do not confer your treatment, then know that four cauteries should be made around the belly and one on the stomach, one on the heel, one between the vertebrae of the two, and two on the thigh, and one on the buttock
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be in proportion to the thickness of the hip bone
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then keep the cautery covered so that it does not bleed for a long time
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not evacuate the patient from treatment along with the cautery while it is covered, so that two meanings are not added to it, and do not feed it until the helper is healed.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery that is to be made on the belly is like a clove, as it is the shape that has gone before, and that in which two olives are cauterized as they go before their shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	End of text
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of the feet and the thighs
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrops and are filled with sour water, know that the feet should be cauterized over the two toes that are not painful, that is between the heel and the ankle; and raise your hand over the cautery and do not move it away; and then raise your hand and do not return it until the sour water has drained out
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is how the cautery is to be made: make two cauteries on the two thighs, and in any part where there is a large cautery at the extremity of the cautery cut
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: leave the knee and the other below the middle of the thigh; and make two cauteries on each thigh
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water that has drained from it is evacuated
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat the other causes that we have said
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of text
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the belly
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is full of wind and is cold and humid it is necessary to drive out the humors, which are the digestive and retaining virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and this is cured by the methods of treatment and is not necessary, and sometimes the patient suffers from the display of virtue, then know that a great cautery should be made over the large stomach as it has been said previously in the cautery of the stomach, over the navel and four cauteries around the subtlie belly, a clove-shaped cautery; and a cautery over the spleen or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the exhaling humors and the patient can tolerate it, then know that a cautery should be made over the navel and the intestines, and firmly adjusting two cauteries over the stomach and under the flanks, which is a perfect cure for the discomfort from which one does not err
Capitol .xxxiv.	End of text
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of old wounds
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in the nature behind old wounds or a wound of cold, gross humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by what has been said in the division and you do not confer your treatment, then know that three cauteries should be made over the wound of the two small vertebrae and the small triangle, and to remove the navel cord cut two threads
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the patient's stomach is inflamed, the food is not digested, and the face is sometimes pale, then cauterize the area above the stomach with a large cautery as before; and on the heel, and on the belly of the patient with a nail cautery. Keep the cautery on for some time until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the patient's stomach is inflamed, the food is not digested, and the face is sometimes pale, then cauterize the area above the stomach with a large cautery as before; and on the heel, and on the belly of the patient with a nail cautery. Keep the cautery on for some time until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cautery on any part, it is better to do it later in treatment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	(End of text
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	About the cautery of fistulas that are useful in nature in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened of it, whether it is healthy or not
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when anyone sees a fistula in nature that is old, corrupted by dirt and humidity, and therefore more deserving of treatment than to cover it up, then do so with little attempt, and with less quantity of the depth of the wound that with greater.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Like a nail cautery.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And put that cautery on that fistula, and according to the quantity with which you attempt the attempt
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And do it until those corrupt parts are burned out, two or three times, according to the quantity of your need
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is on the bladder or belly, then keep away from all those places; do not proceed until the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound until it is healed
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is sealed, and so removed from its matter, and remains closed for a long time, then know that it is already completely healed
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not removed from it, know that it is penetrating or in the preparation of corruption, or that it comes from those causes for which it will be remembered in its place
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	About the cautery of boils
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in boils due to cold or excessive wind, and in order to appease the patient's suffering, then cover that over the boils with a large cautery as before, and on each boil with a nail cautery from which the memory must be taken
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And do it with little force, because three cauteries in a row will be better for the treatment
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	About the cautery of the bladder
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is inflammation of the bladder due to cold and humidity as well as urine retention, then cauterize in the most distant part over the bladder, the hair of the scrotum, and cauterize with a nail cautery on the left side and on the right side
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery is according to the amount of the patient's pain; and cauterize with a large cautery in the lower part of the thigh, or with two cauteries if necessary
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And do it like a nail cautery.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	About the cautery of the uterus
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is inflammation of the uterus due to cold and humidity, and it is prohibited to take nourishment, and the monthly periods are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and there is pain due to the lack of them, then cover that the area is cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a nail cautery on the lower part of the thigh, or with two cauteries, and do it like a nail cautery
Capitol .xl.	Capital. xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Capital. xl.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors are effused to the part of the ankle, and are the cause of swelling of the sole of the foot, the sign of it is that the swelling is prolonged on the other side when compared with them.</end_turn
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of dislocation is grasped in them where it boils.</end_turn
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cover that you cauterize the disease on the part of the ankle with a pointed cautery, because you have seen that it is necessary to make a circular incision around the part to avoid that the part falls flat.</end_turn
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the incision which precedes the cautery is of the kind which is made in the cautery of the stomach.</end_turn
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this incision is not at your present, then do three incisions, each with a large cautery.</end_turn
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do the cautery according to the quantity of the spiciness of the whole thigh; and take care of that which enters is healthy.</end_turn
Capitol .xli.	Capital. xli.</end_turn>
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	From the cautery of the sciatic vein.</end_turn
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the part of the ankle, and it is caused by cold and humors, the disease is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and when it is old, that you remove the disease from the humors with solid pills or artificial or similar pills; and do the cautery.</end_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery is in two ways: either with medicinal substances that consume, or with fire.</end_turn
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The other is that you make three triangular incisions on the part of the ankle according to this form; and do with these good depth.</end_turn
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space which is between each incision is as much as the thickness of the finger and if the cautery is olive or large.</end_turn
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Many people see the cautery on the middle of the ankle over the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.</end_turn
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you will, cauterize around the circle which precedes the form of the dislocation of the ankle, and which is a continuous circle and consumes the spiciness of the whole thigh.</end_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when the pain is adhered to the ankle and does not extend into the swelling.</end_turn
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the swelling, then do two cauteries on the swelling over the foot where you send the disease which is the pain; and one cautery on the heel for four fingers a little beyond the wrist.</end_turn
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is burning, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the spiciness of the thigh.</end_turn
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the disease sends that the pain is extended into the foot near the toes, then do the cautery here where you send the cautery with three points or four or more if you wish.</end_turn
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the disease sends that the pain is left when the swelling is seen, then do the cautery here with a burning cautery.</end_turn
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep this in mind in all cauteries that you do not finish with the cautery while you burn nerves or great arteries, and that for which reason you must be over the disease without causing any damage or contraction.</end_turn
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen others who have cauterized on the heel and finished with the cautery, and the limb burned up until the tumor achieved the foot, and the limb perforated and corrupted all the foot.</end>
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And take strong solution of vinegar, and thus the death.</end_turn
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together do each according to this manner.</end_turn
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And say the wise men of the cautery of the ankle that the circle should be like a circle of iron whose circumference is the size of a palm; and should be deep like the seed cavity according to the thickness of a date seed or less.</end_turn
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And join that circle with another third; and let the space which is between them be the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and these circles are closed with two parts; and let the length of these nails be a nail or two, and do in these marks of iron conveniently placed in the circles; and this is the form of them.</end_turn
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Aprop sia ignit in le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize with three cautery needles around in a circle.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And thus leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to that border and leave the wound open for several days; and finally care for that limb until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Say Albucasis: or, friends, of this kind of cautery we have little experience, for its terrifying effect on the patients, and because few have found those that comfort them with it.</end_of_turn>
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May these best cautery needles be applied to them who suffer, and find relief in that place for them.</end_of_turn>
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May these cautery needles be more effective than medicines which endure, for you shall make two circles having an opening pierced in which the heel of the door will lie; let the length of the piece be two nuts or as many as those.</end_of_turn
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each two quantities of the thickness of the toe; and let it be opened from above and below, and let them contain each other according to this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And thus pause over the ankle joint the patient sitting on their side, and compress your hand over the ankle joint; and let you take warm water and pour it between two circles, and let the temperature of that be somewhat like that of the small fire, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient suffer the bite and the pressure of the ankle — for that other bite is like that of fire — until the bite ceases.</end_of_turn
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And thus lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the warm water from all around the ankle with cool water.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And thus leave it for three days and pause over that border until the black of the pressure has gone away, and leave it for several days, and go from it when it has subsided; this is for the good.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And finally care for that limb until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or the hip, let them be placed in a position in which they can contain water as is done for the ankle swelling.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the manner of warm water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.</end_of_turn
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and caustic not extinct of both parts, take one part each, and grind them and pause in a new broth from which the part left is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters it.</end_of_turn
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause for a while the broth of the other broth another broth heated, and get over that alkali and caustic alive with warm water which will take those up for a thumb, and when you have grasped those with the thumb for a good compression, and read what comes out of the acute water in the left part to the heated broth.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And thus adjust all that water, and get the other caustic alive and another alkali renewed, for that hour if it is not strong acidity is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation is like fire.</end_of_turn
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus of some medicines which are cauterized widely, some are like vinegar and mal anacrat and caustic with salt that are mixed together.</end_of_turn
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And thus relates a a man of the ancients the operation and care by which pain of ankle and sciatica is cured, and magnifies more than enough to be of that, and says that no other care is necessary, and that it is healed for a period of a week just as recommended, for that force remained in the bath and indeed it has already escaped from that.</end_of_turn
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And that is to take certain herbs green, and if it is not found green, take recent fig; and take neither of these ground with a little gray and place it on the ankle in which the pain is, or in the thigh or the hip, and bind it.</end_of_turn
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient can endure of the pressure.</end>
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And thus put that in bath and thus when the limb is swollen, take that out into the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.</end_of_turn
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you must know that no other remedy is used with these medicines but to evacuate the limb.</end_of_turn
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays ja Escorides diysec that when I make a wound in the goat's vein, the latter is cauterized; I shall then apply to it some butter. And let the cautery be made in this manner: let a thread be taken and be moistened in oil antient, and let it be placed between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And thus I make a dry wound in the goat's skin and I fill that which is between that with charcoal; and I shall place it over the thread and let the latter be extended
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And thus I repeat that, and I do not cease until the sensation of the bite has reached the ankle and the pain has ceased
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cautery is called the cautery of cows
Capitol .xlii.	End of document.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	From the cautery of pain of two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some diseases cause pain in the two limbs, such as in the case of worms or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, and for such causes, as well as for infusion of fiery and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery does not suffice but in this single kind which is useful for the emission of fiery matter
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore cover, and evacuate the bad air with pills that are fitted and similar to it, that they be useful over the two in which the pain is three lines according to their latitude, because it is better not to touch any line or to cauterize or to burn more than is necessary, according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance and the power of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cautery be useful with the cautery of points.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cautery or with four at the middle claw in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	End of document
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From the beginning of the swelling of the joints.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The mothers often suffer from this disease in the little children; and a sign of the beginning of it in the children is that it happens to them that the tendons are affected in the heel and that the elevation and the movement are hindered
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And they also happen in the back of the two bones of the foot that already begin to overpower the other bones
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you often see that and you wish to prohibit it, then cauterize that which is circular in this manner
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that it surrounds the cautery over the whole part of the bone equally
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize on the circumference of the bone with two-line or three-line points
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And take care of the area until it is healthy with the water that we have said
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Take care that the cautery is not administered in swelling that is useful for the spasm of nerves
Capitol .xliv.	End of document
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery of gout and of joint pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when the gout is cured due to the cold with the manner of treatment and the pains do not remain, then the cautery is left over.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that you cauterize that which is close to the evacuation in the circumference of the foot bone with more cautery
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be like olive oil of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the nails or into the other joints, and that when the matter goes away, then cauterize that over every painful area with three cautery or with four from all sides with this olive oil cautery
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cautery is needed than these, then leave a little distance from your hand from the cautery before and after the specification of the wound
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains arise within the nail and the heel, then administer the cautery that we have said in the preceding chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the toes and is severe, puncture in the circle of bones just as if it were a wheel, puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain remains in the toes, puncture in the circle of bones around each bone and on the side of the thumb
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain comes close to the joints or muscles, then cauterize the whole area of the joints
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient urgently, but receive medical advice, for if it is well-regulated and the inflammation has subsided, evacuate it with this pointed cautery, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	End of document.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture has occurred in the ankle bones and saying the bones are loose from the heel to the knee, and when it begins to approach, order the patient to lie still in bed and use soft pillows so that the wound does not open from the belly of the knee
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And immediately follow the patient between your thighs on both sides, and order them to keep their thighs inside until the bone is fractured or the heel or the bone is seen to be loose.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And immediately return the one who is saying that to the thighs and bind the fracture on the bone of the little toe with a sign of the limb which appears like the thumb of a circle among the parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And immediately apply the cautery in this way:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it is neither red nor blue
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And immediately stop the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery, and when you have seen that the little toe bone has entered the middle of the pulp; repeat this procedure until you have managed to bring it about in the first attempt on the bone
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And pay attention wisely in the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient there does not come death or any great evil
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And remember that when you are doing the cautery do not neglect the bones, do not trust your operation
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And cover the cautery of the children with caution according to their age and measure
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the place of the cautery for three days with borders so that the burn of the fire is not repeated
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other parts that are inflamed until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient be kept still on the thighs for forty days until the wound and the swelling are sealed
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover that you suspend the food of the patient according to the length of time of the treatment of them which will soften the belly of them, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort to heal
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to take it away after forty days, give him nourishing food, and keep him for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be mindful of work and replacement of food and drink, and of speaking harshly, for when you use this regimen of healing the whole patient will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the care of fractures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and do not neglect, when you cauterize the fracture of that with this cautery round according to its quantity; and what is extruded from the bone just as the third part of it; and take care of that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said that the first fracture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this way, because it is a sign with a sign.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and is stopped in line that is equal to the width at the breadth of the fracture, and another line to the heel; and place your hand with a claw cautery, more the first cautery is more curious and good
Capitol .xlvi.	End of document
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of torsions
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists for a long time in several limbs due to an accident or percussion, and it does not subside with usual remedies or medications, it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed instrument.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery of all members according to their size, their toughness and flexibility, their twisting and their pain
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if the first cautery is not sufficient, repeat it several times; for it is commonly known that these pains are caused by the puncture of some member towards that member towards which it approaches, in order that when you cauterize them, the disease will be cured
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery of leprosy.</start_of_turn>
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Several books speak of cautery for great joy, but management is necessary because of the species of leprosy that is useful for the putrefaction of fat and melancholy.</start_of_turn
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize, consider whether the leprosy is spreading or has already healed in what has been said in the division, neither of which should be, and fear that the corruption will embrace all the limbs of the body and its entirety. Therefore, cauterize on the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one at the back of the head, on the forehead above the eyebrows; and two on the cheeks; and one on the back, on the nape of the neck or on the shoulder.</start_of_turn
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, lay your hand over the cautery a a little distance from the bone, so that the scales fall off from the bone; and cauterize the mass according to need.</start_of_turn
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears evident, it is necessary that you cauterize in addition to the previous cauteries mentioned in the head; and two cauteries on the bridge of the nose, two on the two upper teeth, two on two vertebrae of the neck, five on the vertebrae of the chest, one on the breastbone, two on the ankles, two on the calves, two on the thighs, two on the buttocks, two on each armpit, two on each elbow, two on the wrists, and two on each finger and toe; and cauterize on all the joints of the hands and feet, and on each nail of the hands and feet, and on the hair of the body.</start_of_turn
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And take care that you do not burn the nerves that are on the heel so that you do not damage them.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Several books cauterize with one cautery on the fifth toe and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the heel.</start_of_turn
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more cauteries you make, the more joyful and effective it will be; and know that the patient does not feel pain during the cautery, as has been said before, so that the body is already stupefied.</start_of_turn
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints according to what is preceded by the species of instruments.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the cautery with flour of barley, honey and the other care that is necessary until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cautery of stupor.</start_of_turn
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is stiff or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils and patches, and is not healed, it is necessary to cauterize that stiff limb with a cautery as it deserves according to the greatness or smallness of the limb.</start_of_turn
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And make the cautery penetrate slightly through the thickness of the skin.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And several books speak of cauterizing every stiffness that arises in the hands and feet, in the vertebrae of the chest and see the recovery of the nerves that are tormented by that limb, and that the stiffness is relieved.</start_of_turn
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume anything except that which is learned in the anatomy of the limb and the emergence of the nerves throughout the body.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLV.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cautery of the carbuncle that is rotting.</start_of_turn
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the carbuncle is old and does not respond to the application of medical poultices, it is necessary to cauterize on that one with a cautery beforehand a little according to the quantity of the substance of the skin until the white and the color of the wound are restored, and the color of the wound is changed.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And so treat him with bread soaked in broth and lentils with olive oil, and with rue leaves and columbine seed or oregano seed, each of which take a part and mix them all together, and apply a bandage around the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And so treat him with bread soaked in broth and lentils with olive oil, and with rue leaves and columbine seed or oregano seed, each of which take a part and mix them all together, and apply a bandage around the area until it is healed.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And say the learned men that it is cauterized behind the outer cautery in the middle area; may it be to me that it is not seen here, for I believe that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen several veins that have been cauterized in this way.</end_of_turn>
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize in the circle of the veins as we have said, rather than outside the circle.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .li.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And so treat him with bread soaked in broth and lentils with olive oil, and with rue leaves and columbine seed or oregano seed, each of which take a part and mix them all together, and apply a bandage around the area until it is healed.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some medicines are delayed in maturation, and this is because of excess of humors, or for the state of the patient, who is old, decrepit, or weak, or for the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the medicines; then cauterize in the circle of the veins a few small points; and so let it rest until it matures.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May it be that you wish the perforation of the outer cautery, then do so with the cautery of which this is the form: and suspend that which is in the middle area of the medicines until it has penetrated the cord.</end_of_turn
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize in that place that is further away, in order to alleviate the limb of the arm; and so treat that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And so treat him with bread soaked in broth and lentils with olive oil, and with rue leaves and columbine seed or oregano seed, each of which take a part and mix them all together, and apply a bandage around the area until it is healed.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a mobile corruption in the limb, which consumes that which is like fire consuming dry wood.</end_of_turn
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if sometimes that corrosion is in the place where you suffer the cautery with fire, then you must cauterize the nails a few at a time, as is convenient in that place where it is corroding.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And so cauterize that of all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption and there remains no cause of it.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And so let it rest for three days, and suspend over the cauterized places until three days have passed since you have applied olive oil mixed with sulfur over them until the sores have all vanished and all the corruption has gone.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And so treat that which is like a wound that remains from the infection.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	May it not be that three days have passed three times that the carbuncle has disappeared without corruption; for if not, the more so, since you must repeat the cautery over that which remains corrupt.</end_of_turn
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is medicine for many things in acute medicine, which is half in the place of cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, fire cautery is of greater use for this purpose.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already spoken of the treatment of acute medicine in the division, and therefore take whatever you have in abundance.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	And so treat him with bread soaked in broth and lentils with olive oil, and with rue leaves and columbine seed or oregano seed, each of which take a part and mix them all together, and apply a bandage around the area until it is healed
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many veins in the lower part of the foot are affected by the left-foot disease called claw, which is a great cause of suffering, which makes the foot lame; and the cautery is done in two ways, one with fire and the other with cold water.</end_of_turn
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The fire must be kindled in such a way that it appears like punishment, for it is done with iron according to the quantity which it contains of the key of all parts, and of subtle stripes.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And when you have kindled the fire, place your hand over the key and rotate your hand over the area of the key until the cautery reaches the depth of the key.</end_of_turn>
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And keep it like that for three days until it starts to swell.</end_of_turn>
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply some warm compresses soaked in salt, and keep the compress on the area for one night, so that the inflammation will be eradicated from its roots.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And care for the wound as if generating new flesh until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal, and black spots appear on the surface of the body, mainly on the legs and feet, it is necessary that you administer in those cauteries with water, that is, take a handful of herbs or iron or punishment, and place that on the key; then withdraw a little of the water slowly, and hold your hand, rotating that with the compress of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the tube against the root of the key, and return the water slowly from the root of the tube; and wait for the patient a little while for the biting of the water to pass for an hour, and then remove it, for the key will have recovered its roots.</end_of_turn>
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do the other until they all recover from it throughout the body.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And care for those until the roots of the key are eradicated with the fat that is generated from them.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liiii.	End of Document.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Treatise on the Cauterization of Tremors.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from excessive heat, or from another cause similar, it is necessary that you cauterize in such a way as to make four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the two, between each vertebra a single cautery; and on the feet of the patient, and over the stomach of the patient, olive oil.</end_of_turn
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor will cease and the patient will be cured of the painful disease.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lv.	End of Document.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Treatise on the Cauterization of Accidental Burns to the Body.</end_of_turn
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are burns on the body, and there are pus-filled wounds that are caused by corrupt thick matter; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it is necessary to cauterize over the whole head of the fistula with a fine needle or a piece of burnt mirt, extending the extremity to the fire; or at the root of the fistula longua; or with a slow cautery.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize somewhat at the beginning of its evacuation in this manner; and do not be afraid, for the swelling will be broken and the pus will be discharged by those means, and the patient will be cured of them.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done with caution so as not to cause bleeding.</end_of_turn
Capitol lvi.	End of Document.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Treatise on the Cauterization of the Sinus of Sanctum Affected by Incision of the Artery.</end_of_turn
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	There are many veins that must be cauterized that are incisions of the plaque which must be evacuated, or of the incision of apostemas or cauterization of the limb, and in this case it is difficult to stop that.</end_of_turn
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it occurs, cover your hand over the orifice of the artery and pause over that the thread that you call the end of the suture, and hold it until all the pus from the sinus has drained from the wound, and that it does not remain.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause for a while in the fire the olive oil cauteries a few and many, by number a lot, and dry them over those until they are no longer ignited.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a little or a lot according to the wound and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly push that the thread that you call the end of the suture, and hold it until it is withdrawn and the wound is closed.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And when the sinus has been expelled from the orifice of the artery when you withdraw the thread that you call the end of the suture and squeeze the cauteries, then take another cautery cautiously among the previous ones that are in the fire, and do not cease until the sinus is retracted.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Beware that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that you depart from the patient with other malice.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Beware that when arteries flow freely, it is impossible to restrict them, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or you cauterize as we have said, or you extract it when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the limbs become burned and the circulation is restricted, or that it be ligated firmly or tied with a strong suture to keep the structure firm, or that you apply some medicines that can restrict the circulation; and that you strengthen the area with powder or packing downwards.</end_of_turn>
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May he who gives downward restriction of the limb with tight ligation and stricture of the drape or position of causes that burn and irritate, not cause pain but rather tartness.</end_of_turn>
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May he who is at hand without a doctor or medicine, understand that the hour shows the operation of that vein as we have said, and learn to great constriction of the cavity that the circulation should be at the furthest limit of the sovereign part of the plague, and that the artery should not be remaugut; and that the artery should be moistened with cold water until the circulation is restored and thickened; and may he take care that there must be cautery or medicine necessary.</end_of_turn
Comensa la segonda partida.	(The provided text for the second part of the treatise is not included in the prompt.)</start_of_turn>
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and winds and of phlebotomy and of plagues and of their appearances.</start_of_turn
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucazius.</start_of_turn
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all disease in which cautery is convenient and medicine is comburent, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for it, and the forms of cautery; and we order the chapters of the sovereign part of the head to the feet.</start_of_turn
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that way, so that what is desired may be alleviated, the hour about what has been demanded.</start_of_turn
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And behold, since I begin this, cover your ears, because in this chapter it is for fear of what is in the first chapter of cautery.</start_of_turn
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason you must be very cautious, because in the operation that is in this chapter many veins are seen to evacuate, which is for the life of the limb to which this disease is subject. The evacuation of this is by the biting of the vein with the cautery, or by incision over the swelling or by excision of the tumor or by the evacuation of pus or by the extraction of a sliver or by the incision of a stone.</start_of_turn
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these things are accompanied by fear and tremor and in most of them death.</start_of_turn
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that on you does not fall anything in which you are in doubt, because certain women have learned to manage themselves with the diseases of men.</start_of_turn
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them is some who will go away with their disease and will be lighter because of it, and will help the violence of what they find in their disease, and for the length of the disease, and for the fear of death which is in it.</start_of_turn
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And these are the ones who give you fear and say that you will be cured, hoping for that health, and the severity of the disease is pernicious.</start_of_turn
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to anyone who tells you of this manner; and your caution should be greater than your desire, and your eagerness; and do not presume any cause except for a certain knowledge that will benefit you, and to which you can hope for a successful outcome.</start_of_turn
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the care of all these diseases the prognosis and indication of the one to which health is converted, because in that is to you the helper in acquiring fame and memory, of the savior and the glory.</start_of_turn
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God is with you and will not leave you direction and protection, because he is in your hand.</start_of_turn
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to the order of the chapter of cautery, from the care of the head to the feet, so that it may be to you a relief of what you demand of it and what you need.</start_of_turn
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.</start_of_turn>
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of water that is contained in the head of children.</start_of_turn
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this disease does not leave the children until they grow up and when the nurse gives birth to the head of the child, life is taken from them.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Every vein that swells up for an unknown cause is obscure.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease except in childhood; and of all those whom I have seen, it has always been accompanied by death. For this reason, I leave this work undone in these people.</end_of_turn>
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen that in a child, whose head was filled with water, the head swelled up so much that the caesarean section could not be performed because of its size, and that the humidity increased until death.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	The humidity is either added between the cartilage and the bone, or is added outside the bone over the cavity.</end_of_turn
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the dressing is sparse, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure two finger-widths long, so that the humidity can escape.</end_of_turn
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Therefore, if the humidity is greatly increased and the dressing is thick, two incisions must be made according to this manner.</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is outside the bone, this is an indication that the head has been bled from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press on it with your thumb against the cavity, and this is not due to the unknown cause.</end_of_turn>
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Therefore, three incisions must be made in the middle of the head according to this manner.</end_of_turn
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then extract all the humidity from the incision. Then strengthen the incisions with strips and gauze. Then give it wine and oil to drink for five days. Then remove the ligatures and care for the wound with salves and compresses. Strengthen the head by keeping it equal. Feed the patient with dry food with little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Another method of incision is to consider the magnitude of the swelling and the collection of water, as some veins are more swollen in the occipital region, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore attend to the incision where the swelling and collection of water appear, and drain the water as much as possible.</end_of_turn
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	Note that you must not incision the artery, and even though blood flows freely from safety, keep the patient calm and still for that flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Concerning the incision of the arteries which are near the anklebones, these are called twisted vessels.</end_of_turn
Capitol segon.	End of Document.</end_of_turn
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When swelling occurs on the calves or thighs due to humors, and this is an old condition, and you do not have confidence in the efficacy of medicines, the best cure in this case is the incision of these two arteries.</end_of_turn
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore, when you want to make the incision, let the patient raise their head as high as possible, and grasp the limb tightly with the palm of your hand so that the arteries are exposed, and strengthen the patient's pulse by applying pressure on the area; and consider where the vein is located. As for the places where some of these veins are located under the skin, they are hidden so deep that they are only visible in old people.</end_of_turn
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And concerning the other veins, try to touch them with care, and make an incision in any part where there is a sharp point at the incision reaching the bone, and do so for the width of the head.</end_of_turn
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	Or, if you wish, remove the swelling from outside the artery and drain it through the incisions at the edges of the wound.</end_of_turn
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	The length of the incision should be two fingers' width, for when any vein is cut, the blood flows out with a pulsating stream, which escapes frequently.</end_of_turn
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear on inspection, then measure the circumference of the ankle three fingers' width from above, and try again, and do so until you reach the bone.</end_of_turn
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that comes out is equivalent to one cup.</end_of_turn Therefore, do not take more or less of it, but do so according to the amount that appears from the virulence of the disease and the refilling of the artery.</end_of_turn
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the wound, and if there is any remaining cause of the swelling over the bone, then make an incision to prevent further swelling.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And now stretch the wound with blunt instruments and with limed or silken threads, and care for that which is infected until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When old wounds or ulcers arise from agricultural humidity or from the quality of the lacerations of the temples, or even when old ulcers seem similar to these, and when these cannot be cured by medical methods, then we must resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or to cauterization of these in the same way as we have shown
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient lies on the side for which they are in the temples; and understand that the visible artery in the temple that is shown by the thumb is the one that we must cauterize, since it is hidden in few people because of its coldness
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then strengthen the hand of the patient with some support; and cool the area with a rough sponge or evaporate the area with cold water until the visible artery appears
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And thus you take the oath of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And now stretch the wound with blunt instruments and with limed or silken threads, and care for that which is infected until it is healed.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May be if the artery is small, then wrap that around the edge of the nail, and then cut a part of that according to the quantity for which the edges of the hand have become elongated and contracted, and do not break the flow of blood, because if they are not cut they will not heal the blood
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And now evacuate the blood from the wound one cubic inch.</start_of_turn> Within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then cover that so that you lie that on two places with firm double folds of lint or with strong threads, and do not close it up until the decay has passed and the wound has consolidated.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And finally, we will make an incision between two ligaments; and do this at that moment or another time.</start_of_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is cut off within the bone which is cut off to the nail until the edges of the hand have become elongated, and leave in place of that the work that we have done.</start_of_turn>
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has a fever or has complete inflammation; for the cutting is of those causes that help to dry up the humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.</start_of_turn>
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover properly the extraction of the arteries that you notice in the ankle, and keep them covered with fine dust, and treat with dry medications that will cause the flesh to swell and become soft until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another wound should bleed blood from the artery, then you must cover that to restrict that blood, or to cut it off, or to fill the ankle with something, and strengthen your hand until the blood has stopped bleeding.</start_of_turn
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of these causes are present, then wait a little while until the blood has congealed, and then moisten the area with cold water of violent cold until the pain subsides, and strengthen as you please.</start_of_turn
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more curious in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein at this cut, having two clips, since you have marked the two places at the attempt, and you leave out whatever you can, without setting alight, until you reach the bone and cut through the vein at two places, so that it is elongated between the edges of the hand, which are not consolidated at all by this cut.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the manner of the cut:</start_of_turn
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the acute of the two clips is equal.</start_of_turn
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if there is less acute than two clips it is better, for if there is too great an acute close to each other, the flesh will be scorched too quickly.</start_of_turn
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness, keep the fire of the flame on those and the flesh will be scaldingly torn away readily.</start_of_turn
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all other works and more pleasant.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two buttocks is equal to the thickness of a finger
Capitol quart.	Chapter four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the care of body ailments caused by sharp and acidic humors in the joints
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are acidic, and the cause of this is the veins that are over the head of the femur, do not interfere with any medical treatment, for sometimes the face of the patient already swells up and sits in front of the walk like a walk of ants, and the joints of that limb are swollen, humored more than before, that is to say that they are known to have been hurt before, and the nails are scratched by the sharpness of the tears, which is an old custom in the treatment of these things, and now that treatment is finished.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And command the patient to scrape the nails against the ones that are in front, and immediately make three incisions in the front equally distant according to the length of the face.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the face, and the second according to the length of the tear ducts that are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other side
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And take care that you do not cut the arteries that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of both mandibles
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of any incision is equal to the thickness of three fingers adjusted
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge pad or dry cloth with which you will cover it.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And between them insert the pad of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision for them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That is from the temple to the second incision
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract from between two incisions over the bone, and place your hand over the area that is over the bone that is about the incision to move inside the second incision
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And immediately after take away this pad and insert into the first incision another instrument that is called cautery, blunt from one side and sharp from the other side
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the bleeding from that sharp side towards the flesh of the tendon towards the bone, and grasp that part that comes down to the incision, and fill up that until it reaches the inner part, and ligate all the blood vessels that go down from the head to the joints
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May be continued the incision until the tendon is reached, and immediately make that in the inner part of the incision within the other incision
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the bleeding stops, press the area of the patient's foot with a bandage
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately stop in any soft wound of old age, and place over those dusts covered in vinegar and oil and vinegar again, and whatever does not stick to the cautery burn.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and administer great effusion of lukewarm or cold water, and take care of it with ointment of beeswax with oil of rosemary and other things that will make the wound heal
Capitol .v.	Chapter five
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the care of tears for cats and dogs that descend from the parts that are behind the head
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is some acute catarrh and the continuous flow of tears, and sometimes the joints of the patient extend slightly, and it is already known to them, the ulceration of the eyelids and their rubbing against the nails, and in front of the head there is acute pain of the teeth and subsequent sneezing, which is the cause of these accidents that the matter and the catarrh do not flow but from the veins of the parts that come from behind
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: that you command the patient to scrape the nails against the front, and immediately make an incision in the middle of the face, a little for the width (and start from the left temporal bone to the right temporal bone; and the incision is from the outside of the bone; and extend your hand from the teeth that are maimed by chewing), until the bone is exposed
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Extract all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and immediately replace between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or gauze
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately remove any dust covered in vinegar and oil to prevent the cautery from sticking
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When you see that the swelling has diminished and the pain begins in the nails of the fingers and toes, then you must treat that which causes swelling, as if you were taking two parts flour and four parts colophony and mixing them together, and of these make a plaster and apply it to the swelling that has occurred.
Capitol .vi.	When you see that the swelling has diminished and the pain begins in the nails of the fingers and toes, then you must treat that which causes swelling, as if you were taking two parts flour and four parts colophony and mixing them together, and of these make a plaster and apply it to the swelling that has occurred.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	When you see that the swelling has diminished and the pain begins in the nails of the fingers and toes, then you must treat that which causes swelling, as if you were taking two parts flour and four parts colophony and mixing them together, and of these make a plaster and apply it to the swelling that has occurred
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that exists in the ankles is one of four kinds, either a mineral stone or something resembling a stone, like iron or lead, or one of vegetable origin like rue or bean, or one that is variable like water and vinegar or similar things.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when a stone is in the ankle or another cause resembling those that do not adjust or grow in the ankle, and the ankle is pressed to the sun, and sometimes the stone, when it is distilled out in any of those causes of olive oil or vinegar, then administer the extraction of it, and make it vomit, and apply pressure to the area where the vomiting occurred
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And therefore, when the ankle is pressed to the sun, some pieces of wax or lint are left behind, and the ankle is stretched to the roots of the hair, because the things that are causing this swelling are often soft and fatty in these causes
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not softened, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called epicicarios subtil, which is like this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is softened by the hand, it is good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a little sponge.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not softened by water, then make a needle of gut and insert the extremity of the needle into the hole of the ankle and close around the needle with wax and olive oil so that nothing is injured except the needle itself
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract from the belly with great attraction, because these things are soft like water that we have mentioned before
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Even if it is not softened in this way, then take a lukewarm bath or a cold compress that appears with a swelling in the heel, and take as many eggs as you can hold in your hand and put them on the edge of the wound, and cover that area appropriately with a bandage.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ankle easily, and then dry the ankle of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not softened by all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should consider that the swelling is due to a cold burn or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to treat that is to touch the painful area of the vein of the ankle and extract from the root according to the virtue of the things, and then make that disappear between your hands and convert the ankle to the roots, and make a small incision in the heel of the ankle where the black spots are, between the bones that are soft in that area
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the incision is of a lunar figure, enter it until it reaches the stone, and the stone being grasped, hold that back with the instruments that are appropriate; and then close the incision in that moment with speed, and cure that within that time that it is healthy
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the swelling in the ankle is one of the fats that grow and infiltrate, then administer the cure and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey this order even then, the doctor will take a sponge from you in this way:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And give that sponge to the fatty substance that is causing the swelling in the ankle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not delay when you think that that is already moistened by the vapor of the ankle, and put that in large pieces, and extract from it with nails or with a sponge, or by incision as we have said, because the extraction is alleviated
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water in which it is introduced into the ankle, cover that the pain uses vomiting with condiment at the beginning, and fill the ankle with a little old cloth, and pour over that ankle in which the water is, and if by water it is softened, it is not good; otherwise, take three or four stones of the size of a barleycorn and put them on the foot of the patient, and make them crush in the fire a little, and the patient shall put one of those in the hole of his ankle and jump over the other foot on that side and beat with the other foot on the foot that is causing the ankle to swell
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop until all the water has been drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been drained out, take paper or gauze to soak up any remaining liquid And put one extremity in the heel and extend the other extremity over the fire until the pain is gone
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put the other gauze there and do it as many times as necessary until all the water has been drained out, and then draw out that which is called the extractor of the stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	More in the extraction of a beast that is inside that heel, if it is of small size, it is enough to press and hold it, but if it is of large size which causes pain at the same time, then administer the extraction with the hand and nails, and the cause of this is less severe than all the other causes that cause pain in the heel
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	More in the extraction of worms that are hatched in the heel, when you have cured that which we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations, and do not neglect your care, then it is necessary to cover the heel with the sun
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of the worms appears, then extract that which is in the hand or nail subtile, even if no cause appears, then take a needle and draw out the stone wide from which this is the shape of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate extremity into the heel according to the quantity which suffers from the pain of the disease; and then press on that with your thumb, and do it with many compressions, until all the worms have been expelled
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey my advice, then I will punish you and close the circuit of the needle with wax just as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been mentioned in the care for the worms, and you will find them in the treatise of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which you administer the medicinal oils in the heel with this instrument of which this is the shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or gold, wide and straight, in which there is a small hole, and place your thumb there.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore be like when you insert it into the cavity of the continent here where it is necessary
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the tweezers and wrap it around the extremity well enough to hold it, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ailment, or juice of any herb, or water of these medicines in the needle – and that is in the heel – and then insert the tweezers again with the thumb holding the compression properly until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the ailment and the pain is relieved by the oil remaining in the heel
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infused in the heel is already scorched with fire a little
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep that the cause from which you distill in the heel is not too hot, because the medicines for the heel do not suffer from it
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the care of the oil of the heel.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some girls and young women suffer from the bites of worms that are in the large intestines of men; and that which has already happened in some men, oil in the meat of the heel for pleasure or for nothing in particular; and this oil is useful in the preon of the groin of the heel which does not succeed in the time, and some in the distant parts
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the preon of the heel, which does not succeed in the time, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you succeed in the time, cover that the heel of the patient is exposed to the sun and rest in that
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if sometimes oil appears, open that which is like a sponge of the thumb of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity is small in the width, of which one part is acute and the other is not; and the sponge is of two lion's feet so that it does not make a wound to the heel
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the oil is for a wound born in the heel or in the meat of the heel, then take that which is delicate and cut that with great ease until all the wound is gone
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the oil is in the preon of the heel, then take tweezers of lion's feet and burn that which is a little, and then put that on the meat of the heel
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Therefore, if you smell a population of humors in the water that the patient drinks, because of the gravity of the disease, encourage the expulsion of the disease with ease; and take care that you do not damage the nerves of the heel.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling of the heel has increased in quantity, according to the extent of the disease which you have enveloped in the Egyptian unguent; do this for a few days until you are sure of the consolidation of the disease; or that you take some of the infection and mix it in oil and sprinkle it on it and use it; and if sometimes the heel has already hardened, then leave the infection out and exchange that which you have enveloped in wool for another which you will wrap around it until the caulking softens; and take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Perhaps if blood flows too much, immerse sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the heel, and use another remedy which restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .viii.	(The provided text does not include the content of the "Capitol .viii", so I am unable to provide a translation for it.)</end_of_turn>
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Take care of the jaundice which is caused by the accumulation of bile on the eyelids.</end_of_turn
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Jaundice is caused by the accumulation of bile on the nails of the toes, some are wet, others are dry.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you must keep the hands and nails immersed in vinegar or oil, and remove the scales from their roots, and place your hand over the area to prevent them from coming out.</end_of_turn
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain from the flow of blood, then cauterize those which are lanticularly small.</end_of_turn
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is when the veins are small and the surrounding veins return when the cause of those veins has been removed; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are consumed and do not return.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ix.	(The provided text does not include the content of "Capitol .ix", so I am unable to provide a translation for it.)</end_of_turn
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for large ulcers that appear on the eyelids of the toes.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The nails grow on the eyelids of the toes due to some cause which is similar to a large wound in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is painful.</end_of_turn
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower eyelid and pus.</end_of_turn
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is that you consider if the greatness is derived from them in the water that comes from the eyelid and is widespread; and the cause of it is slight.</end_of_turn
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, open about that which is fissured for the width, and easily drain that from all parts until it escapes, and then suspend that which is oily and remove that.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you do not find the source of the wound if you do not pierce the eyelid slightly, then the water will not notice in any way.</end_of_turn
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, then adjust it with a suture; and take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, you will not do too much harm by leaving that which restores the liquid and nourishes it.</end>
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness is diminishing from the depths of the eyelid, you must remove the surface of the depths, then remove the eyelid and suspend the greatness with oil, except that you dig from the incision, and pull that from all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated from the incision, the water will not notice in any way.</end_of_turn
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and take care of the area with water that nourishes until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .x.	(The provided text does not include the content of "Capitol .x", so I am unable to provide a translation for it.)</end_of_turn
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Treatment for the external wound of the oily substance of the eye.</end>
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The axcirnath is gray that is generated in the layers of the eyelid outside, and mainly in children, aggravates the nails of those and causes them to thicken; and it does not allow the sun's clarity because the tears are trapped by those.</end_of_turn
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore, sometimes those tears are seen running over the face all the time, and over the face while sleeping; and so you must moisten the edges of their eyelids, which already have inflammation, and the imminent appearance of purulent discharge is on the pupil; and when you press on the area with your thumb, pus comes out from those.</end_of_turn
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Every manner of operation is in that which the patient suspends his head in the belly, and immediately suspends the blood vessels and makes them calm, and makes of them a circle according to the quantity which contains all the arteries throughout, and immediately suspends that over that and puts two fingers on his thighs which are said to be throughout so that there is added archnea in the middle of the circle, and immediately after that removes from the middle of that humidity which is incident to the fissure for its width, and the fissure is not to be greater than the fissure which is made in phlegmatique patients.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Moreover in the preparation that you will make the incision throughout until you reach the arteries, because in the meanwhile proceed with the archneal process by fissure according to the shape of white grease.</end_of_turn>
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract that which you have enveloped between the thighs which are said to be above and below and roll between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.</end_of_turn>
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And keep that you do not press into the fissure so that the blood does not reach the brain and remove that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If indeed you do not see the arteries at the commencement of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a little to facilitate the process of the arteries; and immediately after that extract that which we have said; and immediately after that cover with cloths in water and vinegar and vinegar and place your hand over the area and open those which are dusty.</end_of_turn>
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so when they have finished salt and pause that in the cavity of the fissure so that that which is remaining of that humidity.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately care for that which is healthy.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Moreover if during the process the limb should happen to slip away cut, the hours care for that which is softened by cloths until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xi.	End of Document.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of handling the patient.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the patients there are born by adjustment of the lashes, these naturally cause the patient to wink and make various methods of disease appear such as excessive tears and softening of the eyelashes and cloth, which is the cause of destruction of the eye that is called to touch the eye, and care if in four ways: or by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as it is said above; or it is sufficient to touch with the finger; or by cannas as I will say.</end_of_turn
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore keep that you suspend the patient’s head in the belly; immediately convert the lower eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if converted, do not do so; otherwise, insert the needle into that place where it is faithful to the part beyond the lashes of the eyelid, and make penetrate the needle into the faithful place without it, and that which is — from the margin of the eyelid in which they naturally rest — from the lashes, and pull the faithful to the parts beyond the eyelid with the eyelid, and convert that which is over the ray.</end_of_turn
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And immediately remove from the lower eyelid beyond the lashes the greater and lesser tears; and immediately after that extract the faithful and stop leaving the eyelid dusty with small fragments of hair, and immediately after that cover over the eyelid with a bandage, and that which is thus will be like a feather of myrtle.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Moreover keep that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because that which already differs in men is that which indicates that it must be incised from the great quantity of the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is softened.</end_of_turn
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And immediately remove from the two lines that you have marked over the eye the greater and lesser tears.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is like those naturally from the parts, thus as the greatness of the king.</end_of_turn
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And immediately put on the sponge in one of the two angles of the incision, and immediately remove that entirely, and immediately adjust with the suture the two lips at the root or faithful of the silk, and dry it, and make adhere what is superabundant of the threads over two eyebrows with some causes which you desire, or do not cure.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And immediately read the sutures of the threads within three or four days, and immediately care for that.</end_of_turn
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, lay open the wound again after the sutures have been made, and care for that which will dry and contract, because the eyelid is relieved from the swelling of the wound and the addition of it; more suture is better Thus I say to those of ancient times.</end_of_turn
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Moreover in it be urgent concerning the patient, and is of good operation, and do not be afraid of it.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And thus it is another method in measuring, that on the eyelid there appears a mark like a twig of myrtle, and accordingly raise the eyelid with three fingers segregated and gathered in this way.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Or if this is not possible, keep the fingers spread, and if the pupil is not dilated, take a needle which has a thread and pass that through the middle of the mark, and pass another thread beside the greater lacrimal, and the third thread beside the lesser lacrimal, and adjust between the teeth which we have named the two threads so that they are equal, and then raise your hand as high as the elevation equal, raise the entire eyelid above which the mark is made as we have recommended.</end_of_turn>
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for that which is well.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	Or if after this the wound should happen to split, you must close the incision or the fissure, and keep that part moist and comfortable.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And every treatise must end on the eyelid that has been seen to be sufficient for the treatment of this kind of wound; in this way you will use what we have said about the incision; but if there is need for suture, do so as little as possible.</end_of_turn>
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The following sentences continue the medical treatise, providing instructions on how to treat eye injuries.</end_of_turn>
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And thus you should convert the eyelid and split the mark as I have recounted; and accordingly make two sutures or two fine needles of such length as is equal to the length of the eyelid and the width of the mark should be less than the width of the pupil.</end_of_turn
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already opened at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.</end_of_turn
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And thus add some slight swelling under what remains of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the sutures of each part with great strength, and leave that for a few days, for the swelling of the wound will diminish and if it should happen to fall out, it will do so on its own.</end_of_turn
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Or if it is delayed, the hour will break at the sutures, and accordingly care for the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And thus when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the pupils do not dilate.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two sutures as we have said:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And there should be the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xii.	End of text.</end_of_turn>
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of elevation of the pupils in the eye with a needle when the pupil is hard.</end_of_turn
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are not natural, hard and rough and the pupil is inflamed, the custom of the operation is that you take a fine needle and pass it through that thread of silk and bone, and that you adjust the extremities of it so that they do not move in any other way.</end_of_turn
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads be of the quantity of a palm.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And thus take another fine needle and leave it short, and tie the extremities of that one if you wish.</end_of_turn
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And thus keep the patient’s head downwards if necessary, and let the sun shine upon it so that your work may be known, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.</end_of_turn
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And thus insert the needle at the root of the pupil which has required engineering, and make that penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you have extracted that which has been detached from the natural pupil.</end_of_turn
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And thus draw the pupil out again and insert it into the limb, and keep the pupil there for one or two or three times and no more.</end_of_turn
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And thus withdraw your hand from that which has been withdrawn with the limb with the natural pupil in the eyelid with the limb natural.</end_of_turn
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Or if the limb is not withdrawn from the pupil, you will withdraw the limb from the parts beyond the thread which you have composed of that, until the limb is withdrawn from the pupil itself.</end_of_turn
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus with the vision of the eye, for the hour you will grasp the thread and the needle, and groan somewhat and clench the eye, and leave them closed for two days or three, until the pupil adheres to the limb and becomes visible once more.</end_of_turn
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	Or if the pupil is more short than the natural ones, the hour you will adjust a longer pupil than the natural ones, and elevate it like that, or that you will leave it until it is almost equal to the space, and the hour you will elevate that.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Chapter XIII.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the swelling appears on the eyelids, and the pupil is contracted either to the right or the left side, due to bad consolidation of pus or wound or cautery, it is called leporine. And this swelling is either natural or accidental, and it is useful for consolidating pus or wounds or cautery, or for preventing their worsening.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the method of the operation in this case be that you make an incision for the consolidation and separate the edges of the wound, and keep them in that space where there is between them a piece of lead, and bind them together until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not neglect the treatment of the causes which cause the swelling, restriction; for if you do, the swelling will return worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in these cases that soften them as much as possible, such as fennel, and soak them in the water in which they are cooked with salt and seed of rue, or vinegar, which is liquefied with some oil, and immerse in this the lead, and care for it with this.</start_of_turn>
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your care is that you perform all this with great skill, so that it is consolidated in the manner that we began.</start_of_turn
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned, is nothing other than the rectification of swelling that does not restore the shape of the limb as it was before.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.</start_of_turn
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the treatment of the swelling which is useful for the eyelids.</start_of_turn
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This swelling which is useful for the eyelids is truly called vertadierament swelling; and it is either natural or accidental.</start_of_turn
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is useful for pus or for wound or for cautery or for other things of that kind.</start_of_turn
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The way of performing the operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double loop, and you leave that in the flesh, and that you pass the loop from the left lacrimal gland into the right lacrimal gland, until the loop reaches the two extremities of the flesh.</start_of_turn
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh towards the outside with the needle and hold that with the needle, and pierce through with a sharp instrument.</start_of_turn
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if you restore the figure of the eyelid as it should be, good; but if not, take a thread and suspend that in the fissured figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two incisions on the edge of the lower eyelid.</start_of_turn
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the two extremities of the two incisions make two angles of the incision, which have been useful until they meet, and be of their useful angle until when they meet, they make a useful figure of themselves.</start_of_turn
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.</start_of_turn
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And keep the flesh suspended as much as the width of the lower eyelid, so that you do not damage the eyelid.</start_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of silk; and care for those as we have said of the soothing medicines and of the ointments that must be used when it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the swelling comes from a wound or suture or cautery, the custom is to make an incision in a flat manner over the edge of the eyelid as it is said before.</start_of_turn
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the skin between two edges as we have said.</start_of_turn
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the terms of the treatment of swelling when it is natural or accidental, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of swelling, and that is in the form of various mixtures.</start_of_turn
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare some means by which it is possible for him to restore the figure to its natural shape, or in any other way, and that evil disease according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments at their disposal.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.</start_of_turn
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.</start_of_turn
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs among several people in the neighborhood that the eyelid is more distant from the album of the eye, and that it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore you must remove the lower eyelid from the eye, and elevate it up, or extend it with the thumb.</start_of_turn
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al otro dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to perform an incision, then open the patient's belly and take a deep breath of the patient's breath, then draw up the acute spleen towards you in this fashion:
am subtilitat.	If you wish to perform an incision, then open the patient's belly and take a deep breath of the patient's breath, then draw up the acute spleen towards you in this fashion: extend your thumb and index finger and grasp the spleen just below the tip of the thumb.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes that happens and is confused and is in that place, then draw out your hand from your mouth, make a sign of the cross with your thumb and index finger, and spit into the air. Then place your hand back into your mouth.</end_of_turn>
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this procedure until the operation is finished, until all that remains is the flesh of the patient. But if the cautery should slip from your hand, know that you have seen enough, and stop the operation immediately. Take care of the wound at the beginning so that it heals properly.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this procedure until the operation is finished.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the tear-ducts, if you notice it in the mouth for a long time, suspend it with an ointment; and prick that part with the needle, and do not finish the incision so that the tears do not flow.</end_of_turn>
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And spit into the tear-ducts and make a sign of the cross to make them stop bleeding until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of certain wounds and of what comes from a wound that has been adjusted in the mouth.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some veins in the eyes of old people are born with roughened flesh, and are covered until they cover the pupil, or approach or stretch over the eyelids and tightly press the eyelids against the edges and are bound together like a bundle of straw.</end_of_turn
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More than that, if the patient is in pain in the belly, let him hold his breath; and with one hand grasp the heel of the thumb and with the other grasp the heel of the little finger and draw them towards the epiglottis as far as possible, and grasp the part with a forceps or with a needle; and then prick the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the needle, and keep your hand away from the mouth so that you do not cut anything further.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be such as we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps as those which are collected together as described in this chapter.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when the incision is finished and all that flesh is removed, then fill the mouth with coarse salt, or spit out the thick blood and remain like the physicians of corrosive medicines, and keep your hand over the wound until the bleeding has stopped.</end_of_turn
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of pain and it is necessary to repeat the operation, know that you must renew the incision, and take care of the wound with the medicine that has already been mentioned in this kind of case.</end_of_turn
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Therefore, however, you must know that you must abstain from all care of the patient's breath by natural or accidental means, or with a needle, and do not put your hand to any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from the operation.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of bile in the mouth.</end_of_turn
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Bile is seen in red veins which are stretched over the mouth and which prevent the dressing from being placed; and it must be kept in the mouth for a long time.</end_of_turn
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the patient's mouth is strong enough and if there is no other disease present besides the bile, then collect that bile.</end_of_turn
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to hold his breath; and with one hand grasp the heel of the thumb and with the other grasp the heel of the little finger and draw them towards the epiglottis as far as possible.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two fingers gradually in a circle according to this fashion.</end_of_turn
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And finally collect those veins with fine forceps, with caution, and remove the blood as soon as possible, until all the veins are finally closed and have returned to their normal position.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep in mind that you must not touch the edges of the wound; and if during the operation you see the sun, and if you are slow in your operation do not prick anything except those veins.</end_of_turn
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you are finished, then you spit in the patient's mouth green or yellow bile so that the acidity corrodes what is left of the bile.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	May it be so that if it is not possible to collect all of that at that hour, then you place all that you can upon that which causes the pain, and read it for a few days until the pain ceases and that there is reassurance of aftercare.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat over it as much as the mistress desires until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how the forceps are to be performed:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of an hernia to the navel
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When the hernia is cured by cautery or acute medicine, when it has been preceded by the narration and is not healed, do not be rash but make incisions about the aftercare of the maturation, and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is discovered
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is discovered and sometimes in its corruption or blackness, then you cauterize it with this method:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called coarse scab, and is done without fear, and the head is rounded in such a way as to be pierced with a needle or aliskalfat by puncture of the skin (as is the case in this following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And rest upon the corrupted part of the bone, and turn that between the thighs mentioned, and press your little hand gently until you know that that corruption is gone
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if there are any purulent veins, then restore the limb with desiccant and astringent causes
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the limb is consolidated and there is good flesh in it and it is ligated for forty days, and it is not renewed and is not apostematized and does not suffer any accident, then you know that it is healed
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then you must reduce the fracture to the shape of the navel, and do it in this manner: if you discover the bone with acute pain or medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three stripes according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The edge of the limb is triangular, and the head is first extended into the limb as sometimes happens with this limb.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And rest upon the bone, and that from the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little more, and turn your hand towards the wound until you have pierced all the bone, and that you feel the pain subside as if the air were coming out from it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore restore the limb with astringent and desiccant medicines as well as with these methods
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and limb are firm, the matter which was leaking from the parts returns to the navel, so that this is more about the pain.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the swelling of the limb
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the limb swells completely and does not happen at night or diminish, then you must loosen the pain and follow it, and keep fresh air in the neck by sacrificing and sucking; and rest upon the limb liniment which is made with beeswax, aloe, marigold, and ochre, and strengthen the bandage over the limb with wool powder
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powder is that you take lion's mane cloth four times folded; and make from these cloths
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And rest those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the limb has need
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen over those with strong and firm structure; and repeat the fresh air by sacrificing and sucking; and prevent the drafts and keep the limb straight day and night
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	May it be so that while the ligament is softened, then keep it straight
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And prevent the ligament both day and night as we have said
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the limb has already been reduced, good, and if not, then repeat the bandage with the powders and the structure and the fresh air until it is healed
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the swelling of the outer tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the outer tunic, and it is eminent and the process is outside the eyelids like a barley grain, and is formed like a man, and you wish to make an incision, then the operation in it is like that which we have recommended, that you enter the needle at the root of the eyebrow in the part behind in the part forward, and then put the needle in the which is double of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and read the first needle according to its situation; and then make an incision in the limb of the double thread and bring with it the part of the eyebrow in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that part.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa in album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for the oil that comforts that which is within until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And every herb gathered from all around within the circle of the wound near the wound, do so by perforating with the pointed spatula that comes from the prelate of the wound, and run off the fatty moisture, and lower the wound and put it inside.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And do so until it is healed
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the care of gout
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called gout is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the oil resembling water descending and not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	More than the work of the craftsman in it is that you make the patient lie down on the painful area and stretch, and indeed take hold of his head with your hands more than those that you see the swelling depart from those parts and that you dry it and do not let it fall, and put a lamp on it, for the disease sees its causes just as it used to.</start_of_turn>
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not fall down, you know that it is water.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	More than if it is not prepared the descent of the swelling with the oil that we have said, when the patient lies down on the painful area and you take hold of his foot with the spatula and burn at that above the nail a little of the tendon of the ligament in the crown (in the place where the vein comes out), until the swelling is expelled.</start_of_turn
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is expelled, then you distill in the oil cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And do so also with the other causes until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXXII.</start_of_turn>
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the care of the water descending from the oil.</start_of_turn
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of the water in the division and what is convenient to perforate with serum declaring, when that according to the state of health.</start_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You must make the patient lie down on the painful area over a cushion and hold his heel firmly.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And put your left hand over the ankle of the heel, if the oil is on the left; or with your right hand if the oil is on the right.</start_of_turn
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take the thumb, if the oil is left; or with your left hand if the oil is right.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And pause the extremity of the thumb from the crown for the thickness of the ray in the bowl of the oil from the part of the lacrimal gland, and put your hand over it.</start_of_turn
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the bowl of the oil and sit that the thumb has already reached due to the weight.</start_of_turn
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And make that the measure of the thumb to the prelate is equal to the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, that is the crown of the eye; that you see the pupil in that eye for the clarity of the cornea.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And withdraw the thumb into the place where the oil is, and put another herb under it, and thus if the oil descends too much, the patient will see the pain vanish from over which the sight was so bad, and the thumb in the heel of the oil.</start_of_turn
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest a little; therefore if the oil has descended, then withdraw that other herb until the thumb is expelled.</start_of_turn
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Therefore when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the thumb easily, and gently move your hand back and forth, and dissolve in the oil a little of clear salt of gem and in that wash the eye; and then put outside the eye the fat or stop or oil infused with oil and put on it oil.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And thus those things which are of our time stop over that which is crushed in the bowl of oil.</start_of_turn
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your thumb at the entrance of the eye for its hardness — for some of the men of whom the oil is hard does not move —, then you must take hold of the spatula which is called the assistant of this form.</start_of_turn
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore perforate at that very joint, and do not move your hand away from the wound, for if you do, you will cause swelling of the surrounding area.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And so remove the wound according to what has been said above.</end_of_turn>
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must congratulate him on his work, whether he is prepared for the patient who lies down in pain on the stone floor of a dark room, and that he is forbidden from all movement.</end_of_turn>
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest in the nature of the thing so that its nature is calmed, and do not move his heel either towards the fractured part or away from it at all.</end_of_turn
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let him be bound according to his disposition within the third day.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And so remove that from that dark room and expel the evil eye, and make some causes, and then return the bandage within seven days.</end_of_turn
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not let anyone do anything in the hour of the cures or at least be close to the infusion.</end_of_turn
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have in mind that your patients will ask you for water so that the water will please them greatly in respect.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Moreover if by chance a wound occurs after the cautery, the hour covers that you remove the dressing after seven days, and correct that which remained after the wound.</end_of_turn
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	The hour frees you from the sight of them and rests on their face for the time being that they exist in the dark room.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And so go away from that room gradually and speak to them about their causes.</end_of_turn
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in no way is the disciple of vision excused for some herbs, and the hour you remain alert about the operation.</end_of_turn
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And so it has come to pass that some of those who are with us have reported that in the Great Air of Ayrac there is a flame that is pierced by water.</end_of_turn
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anything like this on our land that has been perfect in water, or that has been permitted to any of the free men of the ancient times; and it is possible that it is new.</end_of_turn
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of magical substances for which it is necessary to know those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	Whether they are made of lead or of iron in their own right, or if they are the extremities of their bodies in this triangular shape, the acute extremity is like that of the shape.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXV.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the care of wounds there is nothing new under the sun.</end_of_turn
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various wounds on the body, each of whose causes is like a scorpion's head or a many-headed serpent; this disease is called polypoüs which is like the representation of that head.</end_of_turn
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is a gangrenous wound, spreading, of brown color; and it is like a wound of a lion not of brown color.</end_of_turn
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is like a lion's wound neither fraudulent nor gangrenous, you must make the patient lie between your thighs and put him in the sun, and open the wound, and cauterize the surrounding tissue.</end_of_turn
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And so remove that from the other parts, and indeed cauterize that which you have comprehended of those with that sharp, subtle point of the one part until you know that the whole wound has already been cauterized; for if there remains any cause from which the abscess is possible, the hour you remove that which remains of those instruments which facilitate that until there is no longer any cause left.</end_of_turn
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	However if the lord be merciful with the wound or if a wound occurs after the cautery, the hour you stop is sufficient; or if it is a malignant abscess, the hour you cover and cauterize until it is abscised and the cavities are restored.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And so keep in the face the beginning of the wound a little vinegar and wine or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And although the wound has been opened and humidity has proceeded to the palate, the hour you know that it is already healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And although humidity does not penetrate as it should, the hour you know that the wound is not like that on pus-filled bones of the nails to which it does not reach an abscess.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, when you enter with force into the belly of the person who is suffering, do not rush in blindly, but pause for a moment in order to ascertain the quantity of the dose or medicine that should be given, and when you have grasped the ailment, bring out a limb from the belly towards the navel or towards another part which is the cause of the disease.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that is done, if the evil humors have already left the channels of the limbs, and if they have gone up onto the surface of the foot, they cause the feet to swell like children who have been beaten at school. This is a light cause of this kind of disease.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause both limbs, one which is going out towards the nose and the other which remains in the nose, and immediately administer ointment to the nails that are in the belly, and do this until you know that the nails are already on the nails of the belly
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then pull out the limb, and pause in the nose for a moment, then apply the plaster to the wound as a bandage, and do this for three days or more until the ulcer has healed completely
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, when the cause has passed, leave a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	More importantly, if you are treating this, take care of it like this.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the way in which the instrument called capitula is prepared, from which oils and medicines are distilled in the belly:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or lead, which is like a small lamp with a wick, as thick as a bean, and the meat should be similar.</start_of_turn>
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like this, with a tube, and insert the cannula of the capitula instrument and make it flat, uncovered; to which you will attach that when you extract oil or whatever you want from the juices and causes of the disease.</start_of_turn
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This capitula is precious: recipe of castor oil, white balayra, ginger, saffron root, long pepper, chamomile, and fennel seed.</start_of_turn Mix with the juice of blood and vinegar, and make pills, and let one pill be dissolved in lukewarm water, and give it to the patient on an empty stomach.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	End of treatment.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The patient has now recovered from the disease in the limbs of the belly.</start_of_turn>
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The feet swell up like children who have been beaten at school, and this is a light cause of this kind of disease.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And in order to prevent this, you must take action as soon as you notice the beginning of the disease, and do everything in your power to prevent it.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And pause for a moment over the area or cauterize or apply a burning medicine which is appropriate for the location of the disease.</start_of_turn
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the disease has been delayed, but is recognized as being serious, when it is soft, dark, of a yellowish color and without much sensation, do not touch that which is a tumor of the cranium; for the swelling of the feet is due to the great malice of this tumor upon that from which it proceeds.</start_of_turn
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the tumor is of a lion's color, touches it not; if it is of dark color, and the disease begins to appear in all parts, then evacuate the patient and apply this treatment, and take care of the area with oil and pressure until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxvi.	End of treatment.</start_of_turn
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of suture of the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by contact.</start_of_turn
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Knowing that when continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little faith is placed in that operation except in the hands of an expert.</start_of_turn
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you must deal with any cause of these, consider if it is fresh plague with the sick person, and if so, adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and take care of that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity have already been separated, and some part is still healthy, you must remove some part of the apparent wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle holy oil and sprinkle salt, and place over the powder a piece of diaphanous plaster, or some other plaster of consolidation, and leave that bound for two days or three, and then remove that plaster and change it, and leave that until the wounds are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Mays the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or you add the solution of continuity with thread just as before and make known.
Capitol .xxvii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn>
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</start_of_turn>
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .xxviii.	Mays the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or you add the solution of continuity with thread just as before and make known.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the incision of the skin adjusted in the armpits.</start_of_turn>
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great is the bleeding that does not appear on the adjusted skin of the armpit, where it is necessary to suspend that until once or until you have the forceps and make an incision for the cause, and read the bleeding to stop or to make it desist.</start_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place above the area of bleeding a soaked cloth or other absorbent substances or excitotomy.</start_of_turn
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the skin returns, then immediately cauterize that area, so that it does not return.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Concerning the reason for teeth with iron.</start_of_turn
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the jaws and of the forehead and between the gums are adjusted rough scales, legs, and some bleeding appear of black color and are caused by corruption, and the gums see by that corruption of the teeth that are loose.</start_of_turn
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore you must take away the cause of the disease between your thighs and place the head of the patient on the belly, and scrape the teeth in which those scales appear to be like sand that remains from them, and what remains of the black spots and the citrine and other things that may be modified.</start_of_turn
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if this is the last time that this is done, do not do it; but if so, then repeat the process three times every other day until the patient recovers.</start_of_turn
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And remember that the teeth have needed various forms of support and various figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.</start_of_turn
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that the razor with which the tooth is shaved is different from the razor with which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of shaving must be prepared by you, which you will see in various ways.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.</start_of_turn>
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.</start_of_turn
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Therefore you must care for the tooth from its pain until its total eradication, because there is no cause that replaces the bleeding when it is eradicated, which is a sublimed substance except in the case of its extraction.</start_of_turn
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Therefore when the disease is urgent that the tooth be extracted, you must certainly confirm that it is the painful tooth, because many bleeding cause the pain to disappear from the disease, and it is in a healthy tooth that the pain does not cease until the painful and diseased tooth is eradicated, as we have seen in the operation of the barbers.</start_of_turn
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you must confirm that it is the painful tooth, and that you know well, then cover the area around the tooth with cloth or with forceps, until the tooth is completely detached from the gum in all its parts, and then remove the tissue that is above or around it with small forceps or fine scissors little by little until it is softened.</start_of_turn
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And immediately hold something strong in front of the patient's great pain for good speaking or stupor, and place the head of the patient between the painful teeth that you must not touch, and gently extract the tooth in the manner that does not cause more pain.</start_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	Therefore if you forget it, take one of those instruments and put it aside from all parts easily and easily remove it as soon as possible.</start_of_turn
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is fractured or rotten, then cover the wound with a bandage and bind it firmly to the root with a thread that is strong in the area where the tooth is held.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And cover the wound meticulously with excision around the whole circumference of the gum, and do not weaken it so that you do not break it again, and return over the patient for the wickedness that is greater than the first pain you caused them
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And know that you must not do anything that ignorant barbers often do in their fisting and daring in eradicating them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; for bruised women often bring great sicknesses upon men, which are more difficult to cure, and the causes of these remain hidden, or some of them, or that they extract that which has been proved useless in many cases.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of these things, let the mouth be washed with wine that is cold or wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows from the wound to help, just as bruised women often do, then take away any amount of vomit and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not see that vomit, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of forceps and pliers that are suitable for gripping the tooth at the beginning is long handle and short handle, broad, so that they do not bend when working on them
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And so sometimes with a broad handle, as when you first grasp them, they are not bent, but when you have grasped them for a long time, they are short handled
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And these are the nails of India, descending, and those of the tweezers are extended, and in the extension of these there are teeth that enter one into the other and strengthen the descent firmly, and some of them extend the extension of these so that it looks like the beak of a heron, that is, so wide, and they are of great constriction
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital. xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	About the eradication of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the fractured mandibles
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the tooth is fractured and remains any cause, then cover the area around the wound at the border for a day or two until the area is softened; and at the same time apply an emollient or bandage to the extraction of which is assembled like the beak of a heron called ciconia or guinea, in the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extractions of these are done with teeth like a file or knife
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions with these forceps or pliers, then cover the reason and remove all the flesh and put the instrument that has no name, that is, a small lever whose form is this
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of a short handle, a little one, and do not be afraid so that it is not fractured
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if for this the reason is deeply embedded, do not; but if so, help me with other instruments of which these are the forms: the shape of the first instrument is triangular with a handle of any thickness
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and of more subtle handle
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already with this instrument you have two slopes of which this is the form following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that precede in the shaving of teeth; for the help of this instrument which is assembled like a great wheel, and this is the form
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular handle that is thick or short, of any thickness, and do not be afraid so that it is not fractured.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other things that must be known about the instruments of teeth are similar to the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	And the skillful artists and subtle in the art, finds for themselves means according to what they understand of the operation and the various diseases; for these are the diseases for which the ancients did not say or even recommend any specific instrument, for the forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bone of the mandible or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if you are afraid, then be careful over that in its place with the instruments and pliers that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help me with the management of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be of any size, small or large, and be tied or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or run away until the bone is completely healed; and then restore the area with appropriate medicines as soon as possible
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the pain is slight, reduce the [treatment] somewhat; for in this way the pain in the foot will be lessened. Care for that which is within that which is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	If the pain is slight, reduce the treatment somewhat; for in this way the pain in the foot will be lessened. Care for that which is within that which is healthy.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	About the care of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not conform to their natural shape, they are jagged and especially when they extend towards the women and the revered girls; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is not at all adjacent to another tooth, and it is not possible to extract or ligate it, then leave it alone; but if it is not annexed to another tooth, you must cut it off with this instrument whose form is like that of a shark's tooth and which is made of Indian steel of the highest quality.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be at the place where you are cutting and that it is not like that of other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to wear, then cut that with the Indian steel file whose form is like that of a file.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it must be of Indian steel, the mark clearly evident; and of such a size that when you file with the file with which needles are used, the tooth is filed little by little in several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And when you are finished, line up the area again and remove the instruments of sawing.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a chipped piece of the tooth and you have licked the tongue, then you must cover that area until the biting edge of that piece is lost and equalized, and that it be filled so that the tongue does not bleed or the word does not corrupt
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of document.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of teeth marred with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the teeth before concussion and loosening by percussion or extraction, and the patient does not suffer from that, and you have cured that with medicinal substances, and it has not been of any use, then in order that they do not fall out you must bind them with gold, not with silver, because silver turns green and soon becomes poor in a short time, while gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the gold must be of such fineness and grain as to enter between the teeth; and the shape of the restoration is that you grasp the gold and double it between two healthy teeth, and that you make it grow between two curves of the gold between two marred teeth, or if one or two, until the cloth reaches the sound tooth on the other side
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And finally, repeat the process inside the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not marred.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your incision be at the root of the teeth that you do not avoid
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And when you have inserted the excess of the gold into the forceps or tweezers, add them to each area in the mouth, and convert them so that they are hidden between the sound tooth and the marred tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And thus lay it so that it is firm like Rome.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or flexible, strengthen that or those with the other gold in such a way that they remain firm at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the way of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two sound teeth and two marred teeth, as well as when these are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or two back towards the place where they were lost, and they are reduced as we have recommended, and that they remain fixed.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Do not do anything but a good craftsman and a wise man.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And many are suitable for the cause of the bones of the cow, and it is useful for them as a form of tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth is wanting, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time
Capitol .xxxiv.	End of Document.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents that which is spoken
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is left behind the tongue has some veins or is naturally such that people do not know it, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already consolidated
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, remove the existing scab in the gut; and elevate the tongue and in that place you make the incision of that nerve according to its width until the tongue is free from its recession.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	May it be so that in such case there be any hardness or bony protrusion, and that it be for the consolidation of the plague, that you yield once and split that apart until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the nodulation.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And keep in mind that you must not make a cut in the sole of the foot and that you should split here the nerves and let blood flow of safety.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And immediately wash the remnants of the incision with either oil or vinegar or cold water; and then leave the tongue loose; for this is the cause which the patient has left the tongue in any night so that it is not solidified or softened again.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May it be so that blood should flow out, pause over the bruised area treated; may it be that the blood clot has gone, for in this case cauterize the area with a pointed cautery which you moisten with water.</end_of_turn>
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately take care of the other causes so that it should be healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxv.	End of Document.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The extraction of wisdom teeth leaves the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some doctors have observed that after these operations the tongue is left hanging like a small nail, hindering its natural operation; and this is greatly lamented until the mouth is emptied.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is that you make the patient sit facing the sun and consider the hanging nail.</end_of_turn
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if at times you see a yellow or black spot, rough, to which the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch that which is rotten.</end_of_turn
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is pale, in which there is moisture, then immediately put on the thumb, cut off that part that is soft, and cut off the whole thing; and if there is blood in the hour of your operation, then immediately stop the bleeding by pressing down on the wound, even if it is bruised, until the blood has clotted.</end>
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately return to your work until you have completed it, until it has been washed with vinegar and salt; and take care of the other care for the water until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvi.	End of Document.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	The extraction of wisdom teeth from two angles and that which is nothing in the palate and of the other wisdom teeth.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the wisdom teeth are embedded in the palate, these are salivary glands which are placed together in disorder, which cause them to deviate two wisdom teeth, which when you treat them with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you must consider if the wisdom tooth is hard, yellow, or with little sensation, for in that case do not touch that which is rotten.</end_of_turn
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of yellow pus and the root is large, do not touch that which is rotten for the blood; remove that which is decayed either by force or by means of an instrument, or if it is broken by itself.</end_of_turn
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is pale, soft, and the root is thin, then that which must be cut off.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in this case is that you consider, before you begin your operation, if the wisdom tooth has already healed completely or if it has diminished in any way; and the hours you make the patient sit facing the sun, and the head of the patient is in the chest, and you open the mouth of the patient, and the servants take between their hands the tongue of the patient from the instrument without any noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Either of silver or of gold, and be thin like a coat.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore when you touch that with your thumb and you show it to me the wisdom tooth, and you place your hand on that which is in the meat, the hours take the thumb and stay there, and pull that which is outside as much as you can.</end_of_turn
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another which you must pull out of the clothes, and immediately cut that with this instrument which is like this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled like forceps, however the stems of these are curved, so that the orifice of each of these is at the bottom of the other, not sharp, which is of iron inside and outside.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May it be so that if this instrument is not at your disposal, the hours cut that with this sponge which is like this: And it is sharp from one side, not sharp from the other side.</end_of_turn
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut one cavity, cut the other according to this manner, and immediately after the cut the patient should rinse with cold water.</end_of_turn
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May the blood flow freely, preserve water of decoction of poppy seed or of myrrh flower and keep it similar to that of the causes stipulated until the blood flow is restricted, and then care for that which remains healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Every vein now becomes swollen in the groin, others afterwards in those two heels, and incides those according as you wished and as I have said at the beginning of these matters
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a a woman of apostemas who was born in the groin, who had a yellow apostemas, little feeling, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and I had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she was on the verge of death if more water had not been given for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the apostemas had already swollen so much that there were two ramps between which I had to make two incisions
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I stitched fistulately and remained on one of them, and pulled out the other, and when I had taken out a great part of it, I incisioned that which did not comprehend the other side, and I opened the mouth of it, compressed its tongue, and remained on that side of the apostemas.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I evacuated a great part of it, and did not bleed from it except for a little blood
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the groin of that woman is absolutely cured, and she began to drink water immediately, and I prescribed her no food, therefore I did not cease to make incisions of that apostemas for a long time, and afterwards there was another apostemas in place of that, which I incisioned as long as that one lasted
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I went quickly and cauterized the groin of her, so as to prevent recurrence; and I went away and did not know until now that God had taken her from me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	End of text.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the beginning of this illness when it is apostemated.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the swelling of the limb is upward and is apostemated and is long, the hour it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part wide and round, and the hour it is called buba
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured with the things that we have said in the division, and you do not neglect your treatment, sometimes the apostemas disappears by itself when it has shrunk; in that case you must know that it must be sutured around, and if it is of that length, and is bloody, of a yellowish or blackish color, and is not firm, you must fear that there is danger of the disease.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that the pain has disappeared and the tongue has become limp, which is an instrument with which it proceeds, and you leave the mark of the instrument on the new one, pull out that which is in the old one and incision that with one of the two instruments which are mentioned at the beginning of two mellas.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you must know that you must not make the incision except as is adjusted to the natural term of its addiction, because if you make the incision too much, you will make it worse
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the incision, use the thing which we have recommended at the beginning of two mellas, and care for that which remains healthy
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	When the disease is feared by the incision, know that you must use force in the cauterization of it, and the way of making the incision is nothing but with acute water, that is to say, you must press the head of the patient down, and at the same time grasp the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, and then take some water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and comfort that which is alive, and stop that which does not expand or contract, and from that fill the cavity of the instrument which is like this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Like the extraction of the cavity in which the medicine is stopped just like the cavity of the heel of a ray, and stop the instrument with the medicine over the lip, the pain will go away over the side of the teeth so that it will secrete saliva or mucus from the mouth of that thing for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not remain from that any cause over the groin of it and that it escapes from there.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then put your hand on the medicine and press that against the uvula for the space of a quarter of an hour until that which is being treated has been made pale and quiet by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a sponge and cover that over the limb of the ray, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and put the ray on the sponge in a tube so that the sponge adheres to that tube, and do that for as long as it takes until you achieve what you wish from the cauterization of the heel, and then remove that which has dried up and fallen off by itself within three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the medicine is inadequate, repeat it, and apply the cautery again in the circumference of the navel towards the breastbone, and modify that which is in the circumference of the medicine, and let it be washed with cold water, and let it be cured with unguents, and leave it under guard until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This kind of treatment is more safe than rash and takes less time.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some herbs are cured with water which is more subtle than cautery and rash, which is cured by fumigation in this manner: prescribe calamine, broth, origanum, rue, bitter almonds, chamomile, barley and similar to those herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a dose, and let them be immersed in strong wine, vinegar and broth; and the dose should be shaken well, and in the middle of the dose put a sponge, over which is placed an instrument of iron according to this manner; let it be made of silver or iron.</end_of_turn>
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above the tonsils, until the uvula is not obscured.</end_of_turn>
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat the treatment above until it is dry, and keep that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack of apoplexy, because it would be too strong for the apoplexy, and do not think you should perform it, but declare the apoplexy from it.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument, then take a tube and put a pledget of wool in the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient is moistened, because the pledget of wool prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.</end_of_turn
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxviii.	End of document.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Extraction of stones and that which adheres to the bladder and other causes.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	The stones adhere to the bladder or heel bone or any other cause.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must know that you must extract that which is apparent, on which you cast your sight, since you press the tongue with the instrument of the tongue, so that you may be told what is in the bladder.</start_of_turn
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the bladder, you must think that you must vomit the patient while the food is digested in the stomach, because it strengthens the underlying cause of the bladder if it is forced out by vomiting; or that you swallow the patient a spoonful of broth or a piece of radish or a piece of bread dry; or that you give a spoonful of sponge marine soaked in oil, and bind it firmly with faith, and let the patient vomit that, because when it reaches the place where the stones are and are extracted, the patient will be freed of them.</start_of_turn
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it firmly with faith, and let it be drawn out; or take a horn and bind it tightly, and let the patient vomit it out.</start_of_turn
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes have not been freed, then take a plum instrument according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be more thick than ray a little one, and in the extremity of it there should be a cavity in which you can insert the tip of your instrument into the bladder easily.</start_of_turn
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And keep the patient's head elevated in his bed, and keep that you touch his sides from the belly, so that you do not damage his liver or the bone, or that the physician puts his hand on it.</start_of_turn
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient vomits more, because of his knowledge of the location of the underlying cause and because he can touch it in his belly, he should withdraw his hand from the instrument in his hand, as much as he is prepared to do so until it is freed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	End of Document.</start_of_turn
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Extraction of blood clots that are attached to the bladder.</start_of_turn
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood clots are treated with the medicines that have been mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and do not cause discomfort, consider the time of the patient's bladder in the sunlight, because you have compressed the patient's tongue with the instrument that you have recommended.</start_of_turn
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if sometimes the blood clots are small, extract them with small incisions properly.</start_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot extract them, take a curved catheter and insert it into the patient's bladder, and place at the bottom of the catheter a burning iron, and do as many times (until the blood clots are dead and remain from the bladder) and abstain from giving the patient anything to drink for the whole day.</start_of_turn
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And so, prepare a basin filled with cold water, open their mouth with that, and wash their mouth with that; and do not allow anything to pass from their mouth for an hour, and drink water an hour later with your hand, so that the blood sugar should be as much as when the water was poured.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However, if it is not advisable in the water that we have recommended, then submerge the patient's abdomen or abdomen with the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do thus, so that the liquid will not fall out.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation in the fumigation of that is that you take a sponge in which are burnt coals and cover the sponge with a coverlet of the kind that has a hole in the middle, and put the extremity of the instrument in that hole; then withdraw the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth over the end of the cannula and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodstream, because the bloodstream should fall out
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times; abstain the patient from drinking, and give them salt-laden foods and others, and do not drink water, and if necessary, do this for a long time.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument from which the blood is drawn from the groin when it is seen; it is similar to forceps in this way as often as not, but it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is equal to the groin, and the extremity of it is like the beak of a heron, which is hooked, in which is grasped by five fingers, so that when they grasp any cause, that it does not slip away
Capitol .xl.	The end.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the sermon in the opening of apostemas and in the section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemas are many species, of many methods, according as you remember them, from some in this book
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are various in perforation and section for two methods, of which one is for the species of apostemas in themselves; and for what they grasp of humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places in which the accidents of the body occur, for the apostemas that happen in the head are different from those that happen in the buttocks; and the apostemas that happen in the fleshy parts are different from those that happen in the joints; and each one of them must be treated differently for the operation
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And indeed, some apostemas should not be perforated except at the proper maturity of the blood in those or in their complement
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other apostemas should be ligated when they are crossed, and are not mature according to their complement, as well as apostemas that are proper for the joints, for an apostema when it is near a joint, is prolonged until it has reached the liquid that is in the circuit of it, and when it is corrupted it corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, because it is a harmful cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an apostem of the main limb, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is mature it will not benefit the main limb; or it is proper for the buttocks, therefore perforate it only when it is not mature; and do not perforate it cruelly, except for the one that is proper for the buttocks, so that you do not cause a fistula, or that it is not healed in the end that it is not healthy
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Indeed, you must know the time of the perforation of the apostema, and that is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is mature when it is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and almost the diminution of rigor and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the apostema, and the other signs
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that you must perforate in the place furthest from the apostema and where the cure comes from the prominence
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The perforation must always be done through the length of the bone or the body, if the apostemas are in the parts of the head or the feet, and in the places of the lacerta, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally, in all the places where there is reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use the perforation according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the apostema is in a fleshy part, then you must wait before perforating it until its digestion has been confirmed according to its complement, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, it is prolonged the time of suffering and of great harm, and it makes the lips of the limb stiff and the depth of it
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	The wound must be punctured according to the width of the limb or the extent of the swelling, or as much as is necessary for the part which is suffering.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And thus administer a small puncture, in the large abscess great puncture and wide or several sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.</end_of_turn>
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And thus are the abscesses in which you must make the cordena concave and inflamed, when it is necessary to prevent that it should burst, as it is in the case of boils and carbuncles.</end_of_turn
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are incised with section having three angles; and of those which are incised thus like the shape of a ivy leaf, thus are the abscesses of the groin.</end_of_turn
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those which are incised with round section and lunar section, and resembling these.</end_of_turn>
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And concerning those to whom it is not possible thus as are superficial abscesses, cover that you perforate only the superficial puncture, or flatten only.</end_of_turn
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And concerning the abscess which is large and has collected a great amount of pus, that you perforate it and do not fear that you will extract all of it at that moment; having extracted a part, place the abscess back into the other day, and extract a greater part the next day, and so gradually remove what is pus-filled until it is forgotten.</end_of_turn
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more if the patient is of cold temperament, or female pregnant, or a young child, or old in decrepitude, for the animal spirit of pus is resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and it is very good that the patient should recover from the illness, and you perform the operation.</end_of_turn
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this chapter, and when you puncture these abscesses, cover that you extract the purulent matter and consider therefore if the purulent matter of the abscess is little, or if it is a flat section, when you administer which of the two or both as an antidote; and if the abscess is great and the tears of the puncture are many, cover that you stop meandering in every place until they grow together.</end_of_turn
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cordena has been ruptured or has been flattened in the circuit, cover that you join it with old or new cloth or silk thread, just as when you have treated wounds or ulcers, its humidity; and stretch it on the third day; and thus proceed with it and care for it until the inflammation has gone away.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if there should happen to flow pus during the operation, cover that you administer cold water and vinegar in which there is a thread of silk, and stop that on the area of the flow of pus excessively purulent.</end_of_turn
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the flow of pus should persist, cover that you administer regimen and care and powders which we have recommended in many places of our book and division.</end>
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, cover that you apply powders of wine and oil caut, and place those on the places.</end>
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, cover that you apply powders moistened with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all that is cold until the third day, as we have said, and cover that you remove the abscess and extract it and administer in its care what is necessary until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the care of abscesses universally, more however according to the way of distinguishing which we have already said of each abscess in what way it is a matter of the care of it by chapters singularly.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xli.	Chapter LXI.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses which occur in the groin of the head.</end_of_turn
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the groin of the head there are small abscesses, and they contain fatty substances which are their substance; and the substances are many.</end_of_turn
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of these there are pins and those which contain humidity similar to lime.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain humidity similar to pus, and resembling them; and of those which are soft and brittle.</end_of_turn
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of these there is no fear, as you must know the extension of these does not cause damage to the artery.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of these is that you expel them with an instrument of the kind which you see here, which is called an entrome, until you believe that it contains.</end_of_turn
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If indeed that which is contained is moisture, then split that which is dry according to its section, superficial according to this manner.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line of B, enter the line of G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you will scour that from which that moisture was contained, and do not leave from that any cause whatever, because the troops that were going away return, if they remain from that cause.</end_of_turn>
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And immediately immerse the wound in Egyptian unguents, if it is present, or in water and salt; and fill that with that which fills the wound and leave that until tomorrow, because that which is in it corrupts all so that it remains from that wound.</end_of_turn>
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And immediately repeat over that wound in Egyptian unguents according to necessity and thirdly if you suspect that there is no longer any cause of that wound; when indeed the wound has healed in the unguents.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if after that there is fatty tissue remaining, then you will cut that according to this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	in a straight line without forming a cross, and take nails between two layers of the section and cut that all the way through, and exert your art in extracting the membrane which contains that.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it be that your surgery has done the contrary, but indeed I tell you that you must repeat to me first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And in the like manner do in the fatty wound of the section and of the care according to what I have said; and the section over the fatty wound is lighter, because it has little healing and little moisture.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And many of these wounds are like those of old women whose humors are dry and hard like lead, which cannot be softened, and if anyone should attempt to pierce that, it would burst.</end_of_turn>
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other wounds that happen in the head, there is another kind, just as in the wounds which happen in the heads of children, and you must know the causes of the carbuncles, because the sections of these are superficial sections.</end_of_turn
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those which are in the lower part of them so that the body of the pain is alleviated in the lower parts.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And immediately care for those with that which you are accustomed to care.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 52.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrophulas which happen in the groin.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These wounds are caused by fat that is deposited in the groin and the heel of the foot and the flanks; and some are caused in the other parts of the body.</end_of_turn
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And so those which happen in the groin, and those which are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is due to the rupture of their own membrane, just as in the nodes and the wound of the head, as we have recounted.</end_of_turn
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrophulas are fat, because some of those are solid, and some which contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey care.</end_of_turn
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which your hand is good, whenever the color of the liquid which appears is similar to the color of cod liver, and is widespread throughout, and is not connected with the nerves of the groin, neither with the veins, nor with the incision, and is not a swelling, because you must pierce that which is soft and superficial of the part below the part of the body of the line of G between the line of B, and cut that throughout, and extend two lips of the cod liver over nails, or over pieces of nails if you need them, just as we have said concerning the wounds of the head, and extract that little by little.</end_of_turn
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is better to be cautious not to pierce the vein or nerve.</end_of_turn
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatum not be acute, that you do not put your hand too tightly on the incision, or that you frighten the patient, and that you do not pierce anything that is not necessary to pierce; for if you pierce the vein or artery you will prevent your operation, for the healing of the wound will be delayed by the blood that flows from the wound, and the wound will be opened, and leave that until the pain of the wound has ceased and the wound has become softened and the wound is becoming consolidated.</end_of_turn
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound is closed.</end_of_turn
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.</end_of_turn
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And inquire about the patient's belly to see if there is any other small swelling, so insert those and wash them away.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is concerning a large vein, cover the time that you do not insert that swelling from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then cover that with a firm fold and let it rest so that it does not fall down again.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian unguents, and care for that as well
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you insert that swelling completely, then cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and remove as much pus as possible so that there is no excess fluid left
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Maybe sometimes there is excess fluid due to the size of the swelling, then understand its root and remove it, administer sutures and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And concerning those swellings that contain moisture, perforate that with a superficial puncture here where you see the maturation of the lesion, and stop perforating when fluid comes out from the body, as we have said before
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the puncture, pour in some ointment and keep it moist, so that it dissolves what is remaining of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound has already healed, then care for it with ointment of generative herbs until it is healed completely
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 133.</end_of_turn>
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the excision of the heel of the apostemal accident that does not yield the gout.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	I say that this excision in the heel has not been seen in our land that it has been successful
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of these things.</start_of_turn>
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Maybe in women there has not been an esquinencia, so that the extraction of the heel is avoided, as it is not of any use for the healing of all the veins and the greater part of the illness is here.</start_of_turn>
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Maybe in those who have apostemas caused in the mouth or heel or two anklebones, when the disease is not in the bone, it is useful to use the excision of the heel to avoid the loss which is profitable for perforation.</start_of_turn
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want to perform it, let them puncture the heel leaving three circles of the circles of the heel, or four at a small distance for the width in that which it is between two circles in quantity, that the incision is in cartilage, not in the cartilage, and that this place is convenient for incision, because it is private of flesh and the vessels of the sanctuary are loosened.</start_of_turn
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is timid, then let him extend the Achilles tendon at the heel with ointment, and make the incision of the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sanctuary if you see any cause of that.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then let him puncture it according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the incision of the canal for the swelling which is from that eyeball that is with that that is broken and for the falling of the voice.</start_of_turn
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.</start_of_turn
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is ripe in which the puncture is feared, add two lips of the tendon of the wound, and only that is cartilage.</start_of_turn
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh disappear until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And I say Albucasis that the sum of the sermon that we have recommended, exposure is nothing but to see that among these apostemas many of the patients have already overcome the pain of the illness, and the illness is overcome as soon as death, and the life of them is between the two, and those go to puncture the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe the air over the place of the wound with every breath, and is saved from death.</start_of_turn
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and therefore I command you to close the wound when it is healed, and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for my part is that a servant brought a jug and poured it into the heel of the patient and pierced with that a part of the bone of the lung, and I was called to care for him, and I covered the mucus in the same way as it is done from the dead, and uncovered the wound and covered the flesh that was around the wound little.</start_of_turn
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I confess that no swelling or inflammation had occurred, and the pain arose from the plague, and I cured that which was within as soon as the wound healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	I did not order the maid if she did not murmur, and immediately after she returned to a better state of health.</end_of_turn>
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the heel there is no fear.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section concerning the swelling which occurs outside the groin, and which is called an hernia of the groin.</end_of_turn
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling which is called hernia of the groin is great according to the color of the body, and is not in the thighs.</end_of_turn
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, that is, either natural or accidental.</end_of_turn
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural it is not the work of healing.</end_of_turn
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two manners, of which the one is like gooseberry knots, and the other is like swelling which is caused by the bursting of an artery, and in that there is fear.</end_of_turn
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not presume that it is like iron except for the small one.</end_of_turn
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you must know that which appears like gooseberry knots, and which is not suspended from any vein, then you must prick that as though it were like nodes, and extract that which is under the skin and the fat; but if not, then all the disease must be prescribed, and you must take care of the place as much as is necessary until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the varieties of nodes.</end_of_turn
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes there are many varieties, and I have already mentioned all the varieties in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you must know that I recommend that you distinguish between a node and an outgrowth, as doubt arises.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an outgrowth is a quality of heat, fever, and severe pain until the inflammation of the fluid has subsided; and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, the pain and the heat cease.</end_of_turn
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not heat, fever, or pain, but the stone or sac that is at the root of the hair.</end_of_turn
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and it begins like a seed and is like wax, whether large or small, and there are two varieties, one of which is greasy and contains moisture, and the color of the moisture is varied, as I have already mentioned in the division.</end_of_turn
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a node, you must extract that and inquire about the initial cause of the pain, according to how its shape will appear in the chapter which is nearby.</end_of_turn
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry of hernias and all nodes, that you take hold of that discomfort and bring that into the most humid place that you find in the hernia, and you will remove the strings that you say with that little by little until you know that the discomfort has already penetrated the skin.</end_of_turn
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally put your hand according to the measure of the size of the hernia, and extract the contents and consider what remains of it.</end_of_turn
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture, whatever its color, is expelled, then you must prick it on the surface according to what I have said concerning other hernias.</end_of_turn
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left of the contents, then you know that it is fat.</end_of_turn
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over it with a sponge having the shape of a cross according to this form:</end_of_turn
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	thus as I have taught you, and suspend that which is sticky, and remove the skin or sac, if possible, from that and extract the marrow from that node.</end_of_turn
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is fractured in the operation, it is not possible to extract that marrow, and many veins are bruised therein, and you must extract it piece by piece until there remains no cause of it.</end_of_turn
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the node will return according to the laws.</end_of_turn
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If sometimes some small part remains [of the intestine or hernia], complete the evacuation of some corrosive powders and stretch the plague, and place your hand over that which is near the cautery, and care for the other cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great, then put two fingers of your hand over them and care for the one which is sick.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	More if the pulse is contrary, or not, then you must cover the wound with a cloth of felt that is old and rough, and keep it covered for two days or three until the swelling has subsided and the redness has gone away; and then you can remove the dressing
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.</end_of_turn>
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary instruments in incision and perforation.</end_of_turn>
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the intestines, and of three sorts, that is, some are great, and some are middle-sized, and some are small.</end_of_turn
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great intestine is this:</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle-sized intestine is this:</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intestine is this:</start_of_turn
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of alum, of fallen extremities conveniently placed, so that they may hold the intestines in the apostemas.</start_of_turn
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the instruments, and are called tweezers, and one of them is called a needle.</start_of_turn
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three sorts, which are great, middle-sized and small.</start_of_turn
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The great instrument, its form is like this:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The middle-sized instrument, its form is like this:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The small instrument, its form is like this:</start_of_turn
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I consider that they are for those apostemas and exits and fistulas and swellings so that between these there are bones and other causes.</start_of_turn
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, square, lion's head, as large needles with which the threads are sewn, and are made of lead, or of gold, or of iron, or of silver. The thousand are when they are made of lead.</start_of_turn
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black plum nails, which are remembered that for those it is opened the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that are reflected back from their elevation with those reflections.</start_of_turn
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three sorts, which some are long, and of others are middle-sized, and of others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.</start_of_turn
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the great instrument of plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the middle-sized instrument of plum:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small instrument of plum:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of nails are of various species, which are either simple, which have only a single curve, or of three sorts: great, small and middle-sized.</start_of_turn
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are blunt nails, and of three sorts.</start_of_turn
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails having two curves, and of three sorts.</start_of_turn
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails having three curves, and of three sorts.</start_of_turn
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.</start_of_turn
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a great simple nail, its form is like this:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a middle-sized simple nail:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple nail, its form is like this:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a blunt great nail:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a blunt middle-sized nail, its form is like this:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a blunt small nail, its form is like this:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a great nail having two curves:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a middle-sized nail having two curves:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form a single pouch having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form a single pouch having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form a single pouch having four curves
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form a single pouch having two curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the shapes of the scalpels with which we dissect and scorch nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds, which are great, middle, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The great knife-shaped pouch
Forma del scapel migier:	The middle knife-shaped pouch
Forma de scapel pauc:	The small knife-shaped pouch
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which incision is made are acute, and the others are not acute. They are not to be held in such a way, but rather so as to facilitate the excision of nodes, for fear of injuring a vein or nerve. And for those, the patient must be quiet and calm to facilitate the process of excision of the abscess
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the shapes of sponges, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, just like sponges.
La forma de magda gran:	The great sponge-shaped pouch
Forma de magda migier:	The middle sponge-shaped pouch
Forma de magda pauc:	The small sponge-shaped pouch
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are useful for haemostasis and resemble bristles of a brush with which alcohol is used.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the extremity where the puncture is made with hidden sponge and in which there runs to the intestines and outwards, when you want, just as you see it
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers, must pierce abscesses without causing pain to the patient, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the shapes of these things:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of syringes with which the flow of blood is obstructed, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are useful for citrus juice, round with any length, and are subtle
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you must take these three kinds of syringes because they are necessary to obstruct the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and when you first arrive it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to obstruct blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the lacerations of the veins and arteries, and in the lacerations of the cartilages, and of the breasts, belly and armpits, resembling the lacerations of fleshy humps
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And many herbs are useful for these instruments and other small things resembling fish skin scales according to this form; for which the blood is obstructed when it is necessary for phlebotomy, or for incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And many herbs are useful for their round shape according to this form
Capitol .xlvii.	End of document.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men which are composed of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some herbs cause the breasts of tall men to swell due to lack of sleep like the beginning of the pallus, and so they swell the breasts and assemble the breasts of women, and remove abscesses, leaving.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who complains of this, I say that you must make an incision with a lunar knife according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and carefully remove the whole hardness, and replace the wound with a medicinal plaster, and adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for the inside that it should be healthy
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so if the breast hangs downwards towards the thighs and is softened by its magnitude just as it happens with women, when it is split into two lateral parts with two cuts resembling a lunar shape, of which each contains the other one because the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line of B and the line of G. And so remove the cord which is between two lips of the wound, and keep the swelling, and administer what we have said of the suture and the powders that are necessary for the care until it is healthy
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not comply with the incision to which I recommend for the discomfort of the patient and for the flow of blood, then I say that you must cover the wound with fat soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that which is dissolved by the ointment, and care for that which remains until it is healthy
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Capital .xlviii.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Aquetz apostemas that remain tingling so from the species of scrofulas, persistent, which contain a bag that is sac
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And from those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity cover that they should be incised at the end of the lunar phase according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything is evacuated from the boil of the woman, then you should complete the pot belly and leave it inside until tomorrow.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And bring the pot belly both front and back to the convenience of the water, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the boil is of the species of the nodes, and of the scrophulas, then you split over that area as we have said in the section about the scrophulas in general
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	May if the plague is extended in this way that it will not suffice to reduce it, then administer in it cautery as we have said before
Capitol .xlix.	Capital .xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of boils that occur by arrow or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken, and the cord is consolidated which is over that, then move the veins away from the wound that has occurred; for it is known that inflammation and swelling of the boil occur from the artery or vein: for when the boil is by arrow, it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and when it is by vein, sit on the thighs until the boil has subsided
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is by vein is returned to the sign of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section about this boil is wrong, and above all in those who leave the hairs, and in the armpits, and in the groin, and in many parts of the body; and it is not great, therefore cover that its cure by fire should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May about that which is from their for inflammation of the orifice of the arrow, split in the cord section in length; and immediately cover the section with lead and cover the arrow, and release from the tunics until it is discovered
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And immediately put over that needle and make that penetrate through to the other side, and tighten the arrow with a double thread in two places, — which causes and helps in the extraction of two arrows that are in the temples
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And immediately put between two ligaments with some space until the wound is healed, and that the boil is dissolved
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately administer care in which is engendered poor people until the ligaments fall down; and care that is convenient in water until it is healed
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the boil is by cutting of a vein, then cover that you have at your hand over the boil with the cord, and immediately insert the needle except for the place where you have had your hand, and make that penetrate; and be in that fold double until you extract that from the other side, and immediately ligate the boil with good thread as I have said above in the section of two parts at two extremities of the fold.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May if you fear that they will extract the thread, then immediately insert the thread with that needle except for that part where you put the first needle, and strengthen the thighs with four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And immediately dry the boil in the middle of it until when it is wet that the cord will be split, and leave that which is bound to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately stop over the dust that you have submerged in wine and oil, and immediately administer the care that is useful with lukewarm water and grease until it is healed
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital l of the boil that occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as it occurs with an arrow and a vein, and in the same way that it occurs with nerves when it occurs to them for percussion or occurs by excessive work, and for a similar reason.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is useful more in the places of the assistants or the thigh, or in any place in which there are swollen joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the boil is difficult, and is assembled like that of the other body, and is in the greatest part of the time accompanied by its discharge and when it is stretched violently, sitting in the place the patient is in a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not aggregated in the front of the body, and for so it is left whole, and is swollen throughout and does not go to the parts before or behind
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be enclosed with iron, for that would cause greater contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Do not put anything on the head or face, for that would burn the skin.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If there is only a little swelling, then do not force it, but cut away that which is causing the swelling.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a bandage, and remove that which is causing the swelling; then place another bandage over that; and suture the wound securely, and care for that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	End of treatment.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the excision of the swelling which happened from the cheek to the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, those people who are suffering from wounds caused by fungi on their chests and other parts of their body because they are similar to those which are on the fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head is large; and their lips are dry, and it is from these that the swelling arises, which is small and not significant.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have already seen one of these, and in their belly were two others which were like fungi in appearance, and there was no difference between those which were white, of little root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were cracked and bled, and moisture ran from their bodies all the time
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I advise you to immerse them in cold water until the pain subsides and the other until you see an improvement
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And as for the operation concerning the wound, you must consider if the illness is acute or chronic; and if the color of the wound is white, moist, of subtle root. Then you should burn with a spatula made of lead, while you are in my presence, and evacuate the swelling with the cautery; and if you think the illness is healed, burn that which remains.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if sometimes the illness is slight and the patient is fearful, do not burn with iron; but rather take a recent blister and strengthen that wound, for which the manner is that which we have learned; and let it rest for two days
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tension of the thread of the blister; therefore, do not cease strengthening the blister greatly until it is detached and falls off by itself
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the wound is large, then in the incision there is some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in that which is in the belly
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you must cut away the greater part of it, and then burn that which remains to prevent it from returning
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And take care of that until the wound is healed
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And keep in mind that you should not attempt to burn that which is of a yellowish color, of little sensation, of regular consistency, for that which is abscess is dead flesh
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I recall that there is a similar custom to this.
Capitol .lii.	End of book
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the care of the umbilical cord.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The umbilical cord is useful for many causes; or for fissures of the pericardium which is over the belly, and these you should cover with a cloth or bandage as in other ruptures; or to heal which flows from veins or from arteries as it is said, or for excessive wind that is constrained in it
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And if it is for a fissure of the pericardium and for the swelling of the cloth, the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the flesh; and it is painful, and it appears in various situations
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the discharge of the intestine, the situation of that which we have mentioned above is more diverse, and as you have heard that which is said to be hidden is occultated, and you should return it; and it is painful for it so, and is magnified more than is necessary to remove the intestines and excessive work
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is for moisture, it is painful and is not occultated when you put your hand on it, nor is it constricted, nor is it tense
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for healing, the swelling appears black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is for nothing, the swelling is difficult, large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is for excessive wind, the touch of it is painful
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation is that you must consider if the prominence of the navel is for the safety of the gut, or of a vein, or for infection; that you must abstain from its cure in such a case, for there is fear and danger in doing otherwise as you have been taught in the chapter where I mentioned the apostemas for gut and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is for the intestine or for the flesh, you must command the patient to lie still, and be extended; and you must tie at the circumference of all the navel, and command him to stay between your thighs over the two buttocks; and you must surround the circumference of the navel around the area where you have made the incision; and you must extend the greater part of the apostema to the parts below with one hand; and you must bind firmly or loosely in the circumference with your other hand and the manner of the surgeon.</end_of_turn>
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And you must cover the extended part of the apostema over the ligament and introduce the thumb of your hand into that place and you will search for the intestine; and if you have found it or retained it for the ligament, you must extract the foreign body and bring the intestine back to the parts below the belly.</end_of_turn>
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have found the flesh, take hold of it with one hand; and cut away its excess.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May it be contrary to your incision or vein, you must circle around that area, and return to your operation; take two needles and pierce through those two holes firmly, and insert two needles into the circumference which you have made around the apostema in the manner of a cross, which will pass through; and then strengthen the apostema in four parts over the needles.</end_of_turn
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles in and leave the extended flesh until it falls off by itself; or cut away that which is subtle and falls off, and take care of that which covers the intestines until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is from nothing in it or for moisture, you must compress the apostema as we have said and extract the abscess or moisture which you find in it, and take care of that which covers and consolidates the area.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 63.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of abscess.</end_of_turn
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the species of abscess and how it is best to treat it with medicine, and that it is dangerous to treat it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that abscesses are produced by great heat and caution in treating them.</end_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients say that some abscesses are in places where it is impossible to eradicate them, thus as those which are in the armpits or in the groin and to whom it is ordered to extract all of them, and more especially when they are starting small.</end_of_turn
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More when it is old and hard, do not attempt to touch it, for I have never seen it healed by any means, neither have I heard of any, nor is it possible that it should be healed by anything.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it is when it is ordered as we have said, that you precede and make the patient vomit, and purge with black bile several times, and then apply a poultice if it is found to be soft.</end_of_turn
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient in the preparation in which he is located in the operation, and order in the tract needles which cover that; and compress from all parts of the wound as much as the bandage will permit until no cause of the cause of the abscess remains.</end_of_turn
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let it drain naturally, and do not prick it deliberately, and press the wounds, and dry the wound thoroughly with your hand or any instrument at your disposal.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	More if in your opinion there is great pus in the vein or artery, cauterize that so that the flow of the pus is stopped, and take care of the other treatment until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 45.</end_of_turn
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrosis.</end_of_turn
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, the species of hydrosis of the water, and their signs, and how to treat them with medicine.</end_of_turn
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is treated with iron is nothing but the simple kind of hernia, and is not approached with iron to the kind of tympani or the kind of fistula, for that is deadly.</end_of_turn
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already medicated this kind of tympanic hydrosis with medicines and do not find comfort in your medicine, consider that if the patient has already achieved recovery, or is suffering from another disease, even if it is in the head or belly and resembling those, do not give him iron, for fear of that.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May it be that sometimes the patient is affected with excessive thirst, and that this is not another disease but only hydropathy alone, neither young nor old, for the manner of the operation in this case is that you elevate the patient's thirst between your hands, and minister to them with your hand the expression of their belly, filling the water to the level of the fifth rib, and immediately take a sponge of thorns in this fashion:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Both parts of the sponge are acute in length, with an acute extremity like a sponge; however, take each one in small degrees, so that in the process there does not pass into the belly, and that you leave each one behind.</end_of_turn>
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydropathy is from the bowels, for in this case you must remove the section from the navel for the amount of three fingers below the fifth rib.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	However, if the generation of hydropathy is due to a disease of the spleen, then the section must be taken to the left of the navel for three fingers.</end_of_turn>
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation is from the liver, then the section is in the right.</end_of_turn>
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let the section be over the rib on which the patient is vomiting, for it does not run the risk of causing the juices to leak to that area.</end_of_turn
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And with the instruments pierce the cord, and enter into that section, and elevate your hand with the sponge between the cord and the liver, and extract that; and if there is the amount of a nail or two.</end_of_turn
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the liver until the sponge reaches the level of the water.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And immediately extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or ebony or gold, and in the lower part of it is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and the head is blunt according to the manner of a feather, as sometimes.</end_of_turn
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the instrument there is an arm, for when the instrument reaches the water, so that much water comes out of the instrument at that moment, for if you evacuate less than that in an hour, it will be too little to cure the disease for the resolution of the vital spirit, or for the injuries to the fifth pair, which is near death.</end_of_turn
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate in this way according to the quantity of the virtue of the water and according to what you understand from the patient's disease of the virtue of the pulse and the hardness of the water.</end_of_turn
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And immediately extract the instrument, and retain the water that causes this because it is retained by the cord that is over the hole that is on the liver, and command you to perform this according to that manner.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument again the next day if sometimes the patient tolerates this, and evacuate a small quantity of water, and do this for several days for fear, and keep yourself away from error until there remains little water left.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you fear about the patient, and you see a great quantity of water, then cure him by burying him in warm sand, wash him with bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.</end_of_turn
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, the liver and the spleen according to the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lv.	End of text.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Concerning the care of children who are born with unperforated bladder.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born with their bladder still connected to the womb, and the head of the mixture is not perforated (or is slightly torn or is not in its place).</end_of_turn
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore it is necessary to pierce it as little as possible as is born with a sponge moist without being harmful according to this manner.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And immediately stop the bleeding with a lead nail and bind it, and keep it for three days or for three quarters.</end_of_turn
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wants to urinate, he will be able to urinate; and immediately return that.</end_of_turn
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine that goes over the area will not be able to go through this nail.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The pain is immediate and severe, like that of a thumb that has been struck by lightning.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	The pain that causes the swelling is not in the joints, so it is not a normal gout; rather, it is caused by the head of the kidney being swollen up so that it cannot urinate downwards, until the kidney is lifted up by the hand to the parts below; and it is not due to any other cause, for so the sperm does not reach its maturity according to its course, and is a disease of the bladder.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way of operating in this case is that the patient is placed on the two hips, and then the head of the kidney is grasped by your left hand with violent extraction, and the head of the kidney is pierced at the place of the perineum with a pointed instrument, just like a puncture of the quill, or that you do not take away any part of it, for so the semen will remain like the head of the kidney and the pain will fall in the middle of the belly as it should.</end_of_turn>
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And take care that in your operation for the flow of urine, no other matter occurs; and stop when you have opened the bladder, and care for the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lvi.	End of document.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Concerning the swelling that occurs in the prepuce and the head of the kidney, and corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the kidney.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	These matters are observed to cause this swelling in the kidney, and is an ailment of the bladder
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from these two there is one that is malignant and the other that is not malignant.</start_of_turn>
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, because you suspend with a single sponge and evacuate it when it is done; and then stop over that cavity covered in Egyptian unguent; and do the same with the other, cure it with the unguent diafinicon until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer pointed cautery near the incision and the ratio of the cautery.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Moreover, if the swelling is in the prepuce of the head of the kidney, it is not a circumcision; and one part of the swelling is downwards the prepuce and the other part is outwards; then you must keep the swelling that is downwards until it is consolidated; and when you have cured that which is outwards, for when you have cured that the prepuce will not be torn
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And indeed, these matters occur in the genitals and in the prepuce of blackening and corruption, where you must conquer all that has already become degenerate and that has already become corrupted or that has already become rotten; and then apply pressure over that until almost all that has been softened is like millet flour and tears that are split and crushed.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And do the same with the other cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Moreover, if the flow of urine is delayed, then administer lunar cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the lunar cautery is two-faced, so it is with the flow of urine and the wound when it is corrupted.</start_of_turn>
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the kidney is corroded and is destroyed in an hour, then you must insert into the meat of the prepuce a a plum catheter so that the patient can urinate through that.</start_of_turn
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the kidney (and this adhesion does not occur except in the one in which the prepuce is soft, and over which circumcision is not required; and when it occurs by ulcer or fistula) you must scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the kidney is freed entirely.</start_of_turn
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove these things, then you must scrape with a spatula over the head of the kidney and the prepuce, and you must know that when the prepuce is soft, when it is fluid, it is easily perforated by its softness.</start_of_turn
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the prepuce from the head of the kidney with a strip of silk, which already is softened by the cold water so that it does not adhere to any other matter.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And do the same with the wound with vinegar until it is solidified.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lvii.	End of document.</start_of_turn>
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the upbringing of children and the care of what occurs to those undergoing circumcision.</start_of_turn
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity as indeed other diseases: however, since it is in our operation and our will, and because of that it is properly done in children, it is necessary that we assign in that manner a better operation and a less painful loss of health.</start_of_turn
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their laws, for they did not use it in their customs. It is true that we have learned through experience that it causes aversion among the artificers and barbers. They now use circumcision and mutilation with new and unfamiliar instruments; and they use thread of fine quality and incision at the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	I have already tried all these methods, and I do not approve of any mutilation with forceps, thread of fine quality like that used in circumcision, for in mutilation with the nail the pulp often escapes, as the pulp of the prepuce is doubled over two tunics, and remains tense beyond, and it is forced to another incision and severe pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	As for digital mutilation, which is useful for alphbetization, and which is practiced by barbers, it is not accompanied by the incision of the extremity of the member viril, for it penetrates the tissue of it.</end_of_turn>
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Moreover, in the operation with the nail, one must observe great caution and avoid breaking the skin, for this will corrupt your operation.</end_of_turn>
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often it is not necessary to mutilate in this way, for I have seen many who have escaped without mutilation.</end_of_turn>
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Moreover, from experience I have learned that the use of forceps and fine thread is better, for the acute sensation that arises from the incision is equal to that which remains when the hand is placed over the area; and therefore when you press your hand in proportion to the acute sensation, and make the incision according to a comparison in a timely manner, it is useful to compress the thread with a figure containing the whole of the cord, so that there is no error of any kind.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first way to perform the operation is that the patient should be in a state of greater calmness if he is of those who understand little, do not hesitate but bind the thread to his member alone, and observe whether he has bled by the next day.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Therefore do whatever you can to make him happy in this way that is within your power, for he receives your intelligence.</end_of_turn
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And do whatever you can to make him appear more poised, and do not be absent-minded; and conceal the forceps in your hand or place them on the foot of the patient, so that the child does not see them or any other instruments.</end_of_turn
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And put your hand on the member and blow on the cord, and pull that out until the head of the cord is completely severed, and then mutilate that which is added to it by moisture.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And tie the area marked with thread in a double knot, and then tie another small one below that. Then put your thumb and index finger over the place where the thread was left, and hold the area firmly in place, making the incision between two threads.</end_of_turn
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And lift the cord upwards cautiously and grasp the head of the cord; and wait a little while, for it is better. Then sprinkle some powder over it and over the powder put on the dressing in which there is a sponge soaked in vinegar with olive oil recently boiled; and leave that on until the next day; and care for it until it has healed.</end_of_turn
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The way of the forceps in mutilation, this is the way:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	They are blunt at the extremities and sharp in the middle, so that it does not catch the skin of the clitoris, and the length of the two acute angles is equal to the length of two thumbs clasped together.</end_of_turn
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Moreover, the error in mutilation is that it often escapes the intrinsic cord entirely, or part of it must be left out of the incision.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore you must extend your hand at the opportune moment with your nail to indicate the swelling of the area and make the incision according to equality.</end_of_turn
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	Or if you do not have your nail, you can extract that with your hand and make the incision.</end_of_turn
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Moreover, if three days have passed and the swelling of the member has subsided, when the cord has become softened again, you must wait until it has receded completely, and then gently extract it, making the incision as before.</end_of_turn
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And take care of the head of the cord, so that it does not swell up again.</end_of_turn
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore care for it as we have recommended in the treatise of powders.</end_of_turn
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is necessary to make the incision deeper, and you obey these parts, then you will not notice it.</end_of_turn
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	E mayes cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sano.
Capitol .lviii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Treatment for retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by full bladder due to stones or sand, or by weakness or paralysis, or by tumors, and is treated in the same way as the methods mentioned in the division
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention is due to stones which are already in the bottom of the bladder, then you must encourage the patient to walk a lot.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And put the patient's feet on the two heels and extend their legs from the hip downwards, and the patient should strain as much as possible to expel the stone
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore when the stone has been expelled from the bladder downwards, the urine will be completely expelled
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the stone has not been dissolved by the methods mentioned above, it is useful to make an extraction with an instrument called a siringue, which is like this: made of silver or bronze, with a tube like a pen with a bulb at the end like a palm and a half, and a tube of the same material at the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method for extracting the urine is as follows: grasp the catheter tube doubled and tie it at the end of the bladder or the hip bones for good support. Insert the catheter tube into the opening of the bladder through the forfexes if necessary, but do not force it. Then advance the catheter slowly and steadily through the tube into the bladder.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit up, and bandage the bladder with a cloth and olive oil and urine.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter slowly and steadily through the opening of the bladder; and when it has reached the bottom of the bladder, bend the bladder downwards at the level of the umbilical cord; then hold the catheter firmly in place with one hand, and with the other hand massage the area around the bladder. The patient will feel relief when the stone has passed, and not before
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually withdraw the catheter along with the stone, so that the urine will flow freely from the bladder
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract the stone and care for the urine, and use the siringue, do not do anything else and use the siringue until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved of the pain.
Capitol .lix.	End of document
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of the cleansing of the bladder with clamps and instruments that are in agreement with the aforementioned things.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When in the bladder there is an ulcer or swelling, or a stone, or if it is coarsened by reduced power, and you wish to drain urine and medicines, then it is useful to use a clamp to extract them. This is how it is done:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if the urine is silent in the extraction, then it is closed
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three veins: two from one side, thus as many times
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the bladder, which is filled with urine, and according to the quantity that fills it, so many veins. When any cause is overcome by that which is taken away from the humors, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled with the urine, it is thrown out with the urine, and when it is expelled far away, as the clamp throws it out which remains on the battlefield of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore when you wish to remove the humors from the bladder, insert the clamp into the humor and pull out the urine that is filled in the parts above, because the humor is expelled in the concavity of the clamp
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the clamp into the bladder according to what has been recommended in the siringue; and hold the humor with the urine, because that humor will reach the bladder again and relieve the patient of that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Method of sub-uro-cutaneous crystallization of the bladder, which is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is useful to make it of silver or of lead, of which the head is similar to a small pen, and to hold it with a ligament
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol .lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	De extraccio de peyra.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Ainsi dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquella entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es difícil curacio en les viels.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Ainsi cum pervenem a la curacio de aquella, cove al comensament de aquella que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And for certain from the stone within that it stays let go of the toe that speaks.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little bit by little into the belly of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And place your hand over that little toe that speaks, and expel that to the outside of the limb from which you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to hold the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand and grasp the gluteal region with his left hand, in the part where the incision was made
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus comes out the spleen with great violence in this way:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and tears between the hip and the gluteal region, not in the middle of the limb, from the side of the left thigh; and let the incision be made upon that stone, that is to say on the heel of the little toe that speaks, and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision outside is wide enough and deep according to the quantity that comes out of the stone, and not more, for fear that it compresses the little toe which is in the heel of the stone from which the incision is made and is forced out by its defect.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the stone there is some angle and margin, for that its evacuation is difficult for that reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that liquid there is some that is like gum, and is round, and it is its lightness that makes its evacuation difficult.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is that one from which there are angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus forced out, then you must keep your hand over that [area] or strengthen over that part adequately, the limb of which is like a limb to the stone that you strengthen over the stone, and do not pull it away from it; or that you insert your left hand under the limb.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Or if you cannot do that, then you must make a small incision, and if you see a flow of pus, cut through that yellow bile that has been clotted.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Or if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you must place your hand at the mouth of the bladder, and then make an incision thereupon; and then insert a little bit of liquid; and thus do if there are several stones of more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	Or if the stone is great, know that ignorance is that you make a great incision, which will cause the patient two evils: that it remains or that it hinders the continuous dripping of urine, because the limb is not completely consolidated
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Or give expulsion of it until it is expelled, or manage in the fracture of it with forceps until you extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloes and bandage it with oil, and strengthen that
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And rest upon that limb immersed in oil and vinegar, or in oiled rose oil and fresh water, so that the afterburn of the cautery is softened.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And let the patient rest upon the bed of the couch, and do not remove the bandage until the third day
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has gone away, bathe the limb in water and oil, and care for that limb with diaphano and diabasicillinum until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Or if there is left afterburn from the cautery, adhere and soften it, and from that it looks as if the urine is frozen in the bladder, and for that the urine is prohibited (for that is known as the escape of the urine with the blood), then insert the little toe into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause the bladder to corrupt and putrefy
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And finally wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and against all spices, against that which is useful for its cure until it is healed
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And keep in all the hours of care that you lie both thighs together and adjust the medicines that are placed over the limb.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Or if the stone is small and is in the meat of the heel, and is fixed there, and the escape of urine is prohibited, then know that you must perform an incision with a needle, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	triangular, extracted, fixed in flesh.<end_turn>
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take hold firmly, and tie that over the heel so that the stone does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.
E aprop extratz aquela.	E aprop extratz aquela.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.</end_of_turn>
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And now prick upon that side of the great toe where the cause of the pain lies, and bring the stone to that place, so that the stone does not remain alongside the bone that causes it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The incision should be slight at first; then introduce the needle over that area, and when you feel the stone, adjust its position in the incision according to the quantity that you know the stone will be removed.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You must know that the species of stones are many: some are slight and great, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have ramps.</end_of_turn>
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you must know what kind of stone it is that you are dealing with, in order to know what you are saying about it.</end_of_turn>
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing, close the blood vessel that is bleeding and hold it closed for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation once the stone has been removed.</end_of_turn
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And let preparations be made for your instruments which are needed in the extraction of stones from the body, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.</end_of_turn>
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flowing, and you know that the evacuation of blood comes from the artery which has been punctured, then you must stop the bleeding by pressing your thumb over the area and loosening that bundle of vessels, and do not proceed further; leave the stone and do not extract it, for its strength will cause the disease to worsen.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura la plagua.	Take care of the wound.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the acute pain of the blood has subsided after a few days, and the wound has healed, then you may return to your operation once the stone has been removed.</end_of_turn
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision concerning hernia.</end_of_turn
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is simply an accumulation of moisture in the white sac which contains the codename of the thighs, which is called the sac of hernias.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes the cause is in the proper belly which nature has prepared in that place for the fluid, until it is understood that there is already another fluid; and that is the codename of the thigh between the white sac which we have mentioned, and it is not simply water but pus.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to excessive weight which occurs to the thighs, because at these there is an infiltration of this matter, and sometimes it occurs by a pointed wound which is made on the thighs.</end_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors, for its color can be greenish or bloodstained, or yellow, or black and fetid, or white and watery, and that is the best.</end_of_turn
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	These are the signs by which we know that the accumulation of fluid is in the white sac which we have mentioned: when it is in the sac of hernias, the opening is rounded, declining slightly in length like a figure of water, and the thigh appears, for the fluid contains all around it.</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper belly, the opening is rounded at the part of the thigh and in this way we estimate that there is already another fluid.</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the codename of the thighs and the white sac, then the cat is left behind.</end_of_turn
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then show the color of the moisture in the opening along with the color of the surrounding substance which precedes the shape; and according to what is seen in the remnants, judge what is contained.</end_of_turn
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of it, we must command the patient to take nourishment if it is possible, and sometimes the body itself becomes full.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let there be rest upon the hips two above any cause a little higher, and put down the movement of the drapes.</end_of_turn
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And let you sit on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to follow on the right side of the patient, who will extend his thumb to one side of the thighs and to the part of the navel of the belly.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a sponge broad and cut the thigh bone along the length through almost the fifth of the inch.</end>
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made according to the rule at an equal distance from the line that must be drawn on the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white sac encompassing.</end_of_turn
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And thus perforate the sac filled with water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And thus separate between two ribs the section with nails, and stretch the sac downwards; do not touch the cartilage of the hips encompassing it, and pierce the sac in such a way as is convenient for you
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And pierce it entirely or in parts, and more especially with blunt needles, because if you do not carefully observe the puncture of them, it is not safe that the water does not return
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If, however, blood proceeds from that wound during the operation, when you have completed the section of the sac, return that blood, and adjust the two ribs of the hips with sutures, and take care of the wound in the same way as the others, until it is healed
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the blood corrupted by another disease, when you have closed the blood vessels which are the source of the swelling, extract the blood, and take care of the wound as we have said before
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is gathered in two parts, it is because there are two hernias; therefore pierce that part as you have done with the other equally; and if you are of the opinion that it is an operation, then do it
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And thus take out the intestines, and put them into the lancets submerged in oil or in oiled wool; and after that take another layer of lancets which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over two hips and the belly; and put over that other layers of cloth which you have folded and powder, and tie those over in the manner described above
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And thus take two cloths and fill them with tightly wound wool according to this shape; and tie the extremities with which you wish to cover the wound, and which are covered with fat or wet wool, and join them with a structure at the groin of the thighs, and one of the extremities extends over two toes, and the second over the heel of the foot, and two over two toes of the feet and two over two ankles, and join all the sutures in the groin of the thighs
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And many hernias of this kind are treated artificially with cautery in place of incision with a knife; and that you take a pointed cautery and insert it into that area where you wish to make the incision, and ignite it as we have recommended until you discover the white sac containing the water, and then you take out the cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and so on in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And thus pierce that sac, and it is ignited until all the moisture is driven out
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And thus stretch the sac with nails, and excoriate with nails, and excoriate with pointed cautery ignited; and pierce that part as you are able until you have drained all of it; and take care that the fire does not touch the water
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you must know that this operation is more safe and more long-lasting than an incision
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Though it may seem contrary to your custom in the act of incision or cautery, or the flow of blood, you must know that you must take care of any discomfort which occurs to you because of this, with the care which is appropriate for it as has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Though the disease be slight and you do not expect a second operation on account of its horror, you must administer the perforation as I have recommended; and it is when you are certain that you must do so, because of the signs we have mentioned, that the hernia is harmless
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You must know that you must place the patient on any elevated surface, and pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with the palm of your hand, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening must be wide enough to drain out all the water
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And thus place over the area the elbow and bind that and leave that, so that the water remains drained out
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care that the wound is healed
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Though if there is an emission of water at that moment you pierce that: and that is not useful except for that which is contained in the white sac in the orifice of the wound which makes resistance to the flow of water, for it hinders the emptying of the water from the abscess; you must therefore bring into the wound some other means or instrument with which to extract the water from the abscess, or adjust in the vicinity of the wound a little instrument.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	The water returns and is diluted about every six months or in the spring; and when it is diluted, the pain is pierced according to that custom, so that the patient will pass these seven days.
Capitol .lxiii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Regarding the incision of a carbuncular hernia and its treatment.</start_of_turn
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the incision of this hernia there is fear of losing the bowels in the greater parts; for I have seen the dismissal of them and their preservation for this good.</start_of_turn
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in this case and the species of apostemas.</start_of_turn
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that apostemas arise in the bodies of those who have congenital disorders and are caused by several causes: or for sudden excessive moisture, which is spread on the genitals, or for percussion.</start_of_turn
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the apostema is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and it is a hard apostema.</start_of_turn
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And it is most likely that it is a softened apostema, of which the color is dark, and which is not firm to the touch.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And various causes are caused by the nodulation of arteries, and by the inflammation of those which are already perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.</start_of_turn
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More frequently, however, it is known as the dispersion of the apostema when you press on those parts which are called testicles; and it does not suffice that you touch them.</start_of_turn
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More frequently, the one that is caused by the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause except for compression of those parts.</start_of_turn
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And indeed it is possible that in this case the incision is useful and on the others; and that you insert the hook of the genetius, and draw out the fluid from the parts below, and extract the white pith from the spleen, and deliver the bile from the veins, and ligate them, and insert more bile than you deliver from every part of the fluid.</start_of_turn
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the fluid is already in those hardened parts, the hour covers that you extract the fluid and insert that.</start_of_turn
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any cause of the spleen, or between those which are between the veins, the hour covers that you deliver all that adhesion and insert that by incision round.</start_of_turn
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	More frequently if there is birth from flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, the hour covers that you insert all that which is of it, and extract the fluid just as we said.</start_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, the hour fills the wound with soft fat in olive oil and wine; and take care of that as well as the other care that is to be taken until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxiv.	End of text.</start_of_turn
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia which is of the vital kind.</start_of_turn
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is a hard apostema enveloped by any covering similar to a sprout with mollification of the testicles, and it is difficult for the patient to exercise and walk on the affected side.</start_of_turn
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease is to fear that which precedes the memory.</start_of_turn
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However we must say that we do the operation according to what is first said.</start_of_turn
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that you should place the patient on a high cushion; and in the thighs place the hooks of the testicles to the sides; and take hold of the hook of the genetius with the thumbs of the hands which are to be operated on; and have those other attendants whom you have, and extend those with violent extension.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And insert with a blunt knife a cutting incision through the middle of the veins until the veins are uncovered.</start_of_turn
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from every part as much as you have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.</start_of_turn
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And leave in those a needle with a double head, and tie that in the first place of the area where the vital hit, and tie that other thread at the back of them.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And insert those in the middle of the belly for transverse incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is added of the foul and corrupt humors.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And so treat the plague with the care of other plagues from which you desire to be cured so that they fall from the veins that would cause one of two genes, which is not harmful for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May be the veins may be burst, but it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that they be softened by the veins, for that is private of all nourishment for the beginning of the veins, and that they be established, or that they be softened so that they are not harmful to those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of an intestinal hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The coming of this hernia is because of a tear that runs into the extended sac over the belly from the angles of the miracle of the belly, because giving way the bulges of that break are to some of the bulges
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this break is either of the sac or of the hernia, and this happens for various causes: either percussion, or sneezing, or crying, or elevation of any difficult cause, or for lying down.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is for the extension of the sac, is that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen immediately, and is appeased as soon as the pressure is released from the belly by the pain
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is for a tear of the sac, that at the beginning it causes sharp pain immediately; and it is appeased differently from the apparent cause, except that the corden is close to the apparent cause, and that is for the bruising of the belly, and the body of the hernia to the parts surrounding the sac
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And every other food is forgotten in the belly, and this hernia intestinal is called for this reason.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some foods are fat with wind, and some foods run in the belly wound, and here it is retained, and that is very harmful for the illness, and some foods cause great pain and especially when it is pressed
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness it is feared, for that it covers that it be escaped from the wound in that place
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of performing the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the belly with his hand to the depths of his concavity if he obeys the surgeon's command, and then you are to wrap around his belly with a cloth between your hands, and elevate his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And so tighten the cord that ties the testicles to the parts below, and cut the cord of the testicles throughout; and then fix two fingers of your hand at the two angles of the incision as you would to open the incision with those
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if it is possible for you according to the quantity that you are able to do that from that there should be no remains left
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And so remove that purulent liquid that is left from the cord of the testicles, until the white sac is discovered from any part
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you will enter the intestine said to be between the testicles, between the white sac which is left from the cord of the urine, and between the sac according, and remove that adhesion that is in the part behind the bladder
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And so touch with your hand the cord of the testicles to the parts surrounding, and with my left hand extend the white sac downwards, and elevate the bladder with the sac towards the incision; and command the assistant to extend the bladder outwards and you will dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a completed solution
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look that there is no cause for the belly being covered with the white sac again
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	And if you find any cause of this in it, then you will leave it in the belly behind
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And so take a needle which is thick enough to make four holes, and enter that into the belly under the cord of the testicles, which is the incision; and when you have pierced as far as four fingers, and have made a cross, then bind around that with the gut of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And so cover the ends of the strings and bind them firmly until such time as some of the veins which nourish those do not suffer from any cause that they may not be able to transmit any more cause for that from here no further pain should arise
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And so suspend another portion of the intestine by a ligament as far as three fingers beyond the first ligament; and so suspend two ligaments so that they hold the belly which is left from the cord of the testicles as much as the greatness of the finger, and pierce all the rest according to the roundness, and leave out the urine.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then we penetrate the area below the testicles for the section of which runs clean and healthy again as we have recommended in what has been said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then we apply soaked wool in oil, and leave it on the wound; and we apply the bandage that we have recommended (for several veins have been cauterized white in this place where we feared excessive bleeding, which may happen because of these veins).  We leave the bandage in place until it falls off by itself
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Even if the case is prolonged, however, cold water must be applied, and leave it on until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound like any other wound until it is healed
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	Of windy hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia nothing has been seen that has been omitted in its care.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And first say that it is useful as we have recommended in the hernia that is seen; that is to say, you tie the vessels close to the section above where it facilitates them; and then dry in the middle area around the tumor as much as possible until the vessels fall off
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And care for the wound as we have said until it is healed
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that is useful for the joints
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Several veins have burst in the joints as we have said, and examine the area
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not cause excessive bleeding in the knee; and if there is any, it is little; return immediately in all cases
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Even if the time is prolonged, however, adjust the fracture in the limb until the bleeding stops; and this happens because of the extension of the limb which is in the joints as we have said, which causes the limb to be extended, and therefore it is softened and the area is dehisced and examined
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the care for it is like that which precedes the narration of it
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And every vein is cured with iron like this: the patient sits on the stool between your two legs, and then dry the area of the rupture of the bones examined with a section towards the outside according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white limb that is under the testicles until it is revealed
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and leave it on the highest part of the limb, and hold that on the flank of the abdomen
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then suture the two highest parts on the extremity of the limb, and adjust with the suture one to the other
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the limb from the artery, and do not insert any part of the limb, neither do not extend the bone, nor any other cause like I told you in the care of intestinal hernia
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then care for it like the care of wounds, and when you have incisions, soften that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the limb is contracted and the swelling is not adjusted
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And it is better in this place, because it is more likely to be saved
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the testicles' cord
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many veins of the testicles' cord in several men are softened to help soften the flesh that is between them, and it is fed from it accordingly
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When it is necessary for the one who is being treated to sit with his two legs apart, and he tears all the cord that is softened over the natural cord; and then that two lips are adjusted with the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, you can also ligate the excess of the softened cord with three stitches or four with a firm suture
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then penetrate between the sutures; and then care for the care of the other wounds until they are healed and the incisions fall off
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69
De castracio.	Of castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Wisdom dictates that castration is forbidden in our law, however, I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two instances, of which the one is that the physician should know how to care for it when asked about it, since he knows the care of it when it happens; and the other instance is that we must sometimes castrate other beasts for our young people for their pleasures, as well as mares, and sows, and goats, and pigs, and in the same way as beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Therefore I say that castration is caused in two ways: either by extrusion or by incision at the root.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of extrusion, the method of the operation is that we must cut off the beast in cold water until the testicles soften and become limp, and hang them down.</end_turn>
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take hold of them with your hand so that they do not appear to touch.</end_turn>
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration caused by incision and section, because you must hold the beast and press the testicles with your left hand.</end_turn
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then join the supporters, and make an incision on each side of the belly with two incisions proceeding from the belly button.</end_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make the incisions when there is any swelling.</end_turn>
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not neglect any cause of swelling, but take for granted the subtle swelling that is on the vessels.</end_turn><end_turn>
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than extrusion, because extrusion causes great swelling of the testicles, which would cause the beast to desire to bite.</end_turn><end_turn>
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the wound until it has healed.</end_turn><end_turn>
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LX.</end_turn>
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the care of hermaphroditism.</end_turn>
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is in two ways: when or if there is an opening in the belly of the testicles, in which there is a bulge like that of a woman in which there is a swelling between the testicles.</end_turn
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some women have a urinary bladder in the belly of the testicles.</end_turn
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women it is a kind: and it is that the woman who has a penis like a man between the testicles has two testicles like a man, a little smaller than the normal testicles of a man.</end_turn
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the care is of three kinds: two of the men and one of the women.</end_turn
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must cut away those fatty parts until the tumor is expelled, and that you take care of them with care like other wounds.</end_turn><end_turn
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of the men of which there is a urinary bladder in the belly of the testicles, there is no care or operation for them.</end_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</end_turn
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of leech and ointment for the causes of women.</end_turn
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The strong leech is applied to natural causes until it is relaxed and is used legally; and some women are plagued with it as much as in men and even during coitus.</end_turn><end_turn>
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore take hold of the excess of leech with your hand or with a sponge and apply it.</end_turn><end_turn
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not hesitate to make an incision, especially in the groin, so that the blood does not clot.</end_turn><end_turn
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care of that like with the care of wounds until it has healed.</end_turn><end_turn
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And no new ointment is born except that which is in the horror of the mother until it fills that up, and the strong ointment is ejected to the parts like a sponge according to custom (and for this reason it is called "caudal disease"); therefore we must apply it just as we apply the leech, and care for that until it has healed.</end_turn><end_turn
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXII.</end_turn
De curacio de alratica.	Of the care of wound.</end_turn
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	A wound is when the woman does not have a hole, or has a small hole.</end_turn
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.</end_turn><end_turn
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is for a disease that has preceded it, or that is caused by no adjustment of the flesh or by a subtle or thick wound.</end_turn><end_turn
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is found in the groin, on the sides, on the navel, or on the buttocks, and prevents sweating, movement, and intercourse, and strong ointment prevents menstruation.</end_turn><end_turn
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is useful for the regulation of the womb, if the swelling is apparent, it is necessary; but if it is not apparent, when you touch that area you will feel it.</end_turn><end_turn
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	The patient is experiencing pain in various parts of the body, likely due to cold humors. The physician suggests that this is likely gout. If necessary, the physician instructs the assistant to make small incisions on the foot's surface using a pointed cautery. Additionally, the physician advises reducing any swelling or blisters and placing a hand over the area to prevent any internal organs from protruding.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When the thighs are powdered with flour, and the assistant indicates that the bowels are full, then it is a sign of imminent discharge.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The female should sit on the two hips, the cushions should be spread out, and extend the thighs with force until the subtle swelling has burst and the swelling has opened
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take some wool and soak it in oil, place that over the area, and hold that there for so long as the area does not solidify
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the swelling is large and thick, then cover that with some thick fat or a sprig of myrtle leaf
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the swelling is bloody, then suspend that for a while, and make an incision there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And give the patient the medicines that stop the flow of blood that causes swelling, such as vinegar, alum, and saffron, adjusted with oil of hyssop
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And give a wide needle of lead so that the wound does not solidify too much.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep that for four days and give a dry gauze
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And take care of it with the other care of consolidation until it is healed
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Whenever such things happen in the greater part of the birth of other parts, and the physician has observed in this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If there is an afterbirth of bones, do not make it contrary to the force in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	End of Document
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the care of haemorrhoids, piles and red swelling that happen in the belly of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Haemorrhoids are appreciated from the veins of the buttocks rather than from those that carry blood continuously; and when they are ancient haemorrhoids and are made by the tears.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those things that I mentioned before, and I say that those that receive care and those that do not receive care
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that haemorrhoids and piles when they are in the belly and do not show any sign, do not require any treatment
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	However, those that are in the opening of the belly about which there is a sensation, are those that must be treated
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must put the woman in more heat and loosen the thighs with the forceps, or with rough wool, and make incisions there with the roots
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And sprinkle over those there must flow the blood of one of the veins that is bleeding from the incisions, just like vinegar and like blood clot
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And put the lower limbs in hot water for an hour, and then stop that in cold water
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, that is to say that there is decoction of blood and of blackheads and of pus and of humours.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And give barley food and comfort that has honey and vinegar and make a plaster with water over the two of them
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is evacuated, well; but if not, make her adhere to two cushions, and to the breasts there is sacrifice
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And give wool and soak it in the juice of marjoram or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of aloe with a little wine and make her adhere to the area; and take care of the area until it is healed
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	And if the thing that is rough is regarding, do not make incisions against that as I have said in the treatment of that swelling
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that until it is healed
Capitol .lxxiv.	End of Document
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an abscess that happens in the belly
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various species of abscesses that happen in the belly, such as carbuncles, abscesses that arise from boils and ulcers, abscesses filled with pus and blood clots, and hernias, fistula of haemorrhoids, boils and other abscesses
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken about these diseases, their kinds, their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I say in this treatise that the most common cause of gout is excessive cold, which, when it infects all parts of the body, causes pain in the feet. And if you wish to know how this operation is performed, I shall tell you.</end_turn>
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, if you consider that the sudden pain of gout in the heel begins with percussion, swelling, and fever, and sometimes when it engulfs and if you prick about that feeling, do not perforate it; rather do what helps to mature it until the acute symptoms cease.</end_turn
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Therefore, make an incision over a callous that has two callous; recline on the heel two and adjust the lower legs to the part beyond the belly, and the lower buttocks will be spread out, and place your hands over the belly so that the intestine does not come out.</end_turn
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then follow the midwife closely with the flank that is to be opened and administer the instrument with which the opening of the greater part will be made, the form of which will come in those causes that make it necessary.</end_turn
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you are going to administer this instrument, stay close to the edge of the greater part of the foot, and what comes out of the instrument into the greater part should not be more than the edge of the greater part and cause pain.</end_turn
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the edge of the greater part, then pause powder on the texture of the edge of the greater part so that no other instrument can penetrate the edge of the greater part.</end_turn
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And that you pause the tremor that runs in the instrument of the flank as soon as it is detached and that the minister hold the instrument and rotate the tremor until the opening of the greater part is made.</end_turn
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the evacuation comes, which is touched with the hand and is yellow and bloody, then you should stop it by pressing on it with the thumb of your hand.</end_turn
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healing is evacuated, then you should place in the wound a soaked sponge in olive oil or green oil in which there is any spasm; and keep the heel still in the section of the greater part of the foot.</end_turn
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And keep the greater part covered and over the wound a clean cloth soaked in water in which there are boiled mallows.</end_turn
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And keep the wound clean for two days until the swelling has gone down.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And every day the foot and the wound should be washed with water and salt, and should be covered with water in which lilies or long-haired violets are boiled, and then return to the wound.</end_turn
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound becomes infected in the foot, then you should be prohibited from treating it with fire, following the treatment that has been mentioned in the division.</end_turn
Capitol .lxxv.	End of treatise.</end_turn>
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner they should administer these remedies when necessary according to figures that are not natural.</end_turn
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	There is a necessary reason because the midwife at the beginning knows the natural figure of childbirth by its signs, and that when the woman goes into labor and wants to smell the air, and when this happens there is an expulsion from the parts below and she wants to vomit, the hour is that this part is in a natural figure, and that is the expulsion of the head, and the second one is that of the navel or suspension or pendency.</end_turn
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, you must compress the belly so that the embryo comes down slightly from the head, and this is accompanied by the vomiting of those superfluities with good monitoring.</end_turn
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	For example, when the embryo comes down onto its feet and the body of the fetus comes forward over the head of the fetus, and the foot or the hand, that is, or the head and the hand are ejected, or the head is ejected over the belly, and such things are contrary to the natural figures.</end_turn
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be skilled and prudent in all these cases, and to guard against error and deception.</end_turn
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I have shown you all the figures of these things, and what is their meaning for these things so that you know what they are and what is not.</end_turn
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the male seed escapes through the natural orifice of the semen, and that which is vehement upon the thigh is done to it which is difficult, and sometimes the art itself is already weakened, then it is customary to say that the woman has the power, or that the thighs have power, and it vaporizes with the smoke of cinnamon and with the smell of warm hum.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And immediately insert the metronome between the thighs said above, put a little sponge there and make a hole at that point, or cut off that which is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it descends the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Maybe if it does not descend, the hour covers that the woman be covered with mucus of peas and mucus of cinnamon at the edges
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And immediately command her, immediately cry, that she be compressed and make that she vomit at convenience; and close her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus may be forgotten as much as possible
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if two-thirds of the fetus have already forgotten at the beginning, the hour covers that you reduce them little by little
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Maybe if it does not obey the order, the hour pauses the woman over a cushion and lifts her feet up, and immediately put a cushion under her; and the woman be held that she does not fall from the cushion
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the greatest part is not returned and the fetus dies, the hour incites those and extracts the fetus or ties his body to her hand and extracts that which is equal, so that that which is forgotten may be forgotten
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Thus from this time of the embryo until the feet of the legs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes down to the feet of the legs, the hour covers that you press those against his belly, and immediately make the fetus small, and immediately cause him to vomit, and immediately take hold of one foot and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	And when they are within the space, the hour commands her to groan, and make her vomit at convenience, for if God wills it, that which is forgotten will be forgotten
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten in what we have recounted, the hour returns the fetus little by little until it pauses at that second natural figure, for that which is forgotten in that will be forgotten at that time.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in all that we have recounted, the hour takes from high mucus and dissolved gum, and pierce all over the foot for good percussion, and immediately place on that which is in the belly of the woman, the fluid from the belly of the woman.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And immediately make that incision in water, until you have completed the hypocondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And sometimes when the parts have become softened, the hour makes them undergo fumigation of myrtle and suspends that for them.<end_turn>
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the fumigation has lasted for an hour, the hour makes her lie on a cushion, and immediately make her vomit and pull out her mouth, and take from her that which is below, and press the lower part of her belly with her hand, so that the fetus may be forgotten as much as possible.<end_turn>
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Thus from this time of the fetus until the soles of the feet and their parts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus lies in this way, the hour orders you to gradually bring down her smaller things; and immediately the woman should be placed sitting over the thigh, and the feet put on the ground, and those should be kept still on the thighs, and finish her things.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And immediately press little by little on her belly, and immediately extract what is left of the feet from the ankles until it is ready in the lower part.<end_turn>
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, the hour takes his feet and makes those violent movements, and immediately press what is on the hypocondria little by little until the fetus expels the parts spontaneously.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And immediately take down her things and gradually make the fetus small, and command the woman to groan until the fetus is forgotten
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Thus from this time of the fetus while one of her things hangs out laterally.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	So order to reduce her hand, even if you cannot reduce it, the hour raises the woman and commands her to go away.</start_turn>
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she goes away cannot, the hour makes her lie on her side, and with her thighs clenched with violent percussion, and immediately administer to her those which you gave and recommended of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If it is urgent, do that which is necessary to save the limb, and study carefully the reduction of the hand, and bind the foot according to its natural figure, and make the woman vomit and command her to keep her bowels closed until the pain has subsided.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Indeed, when the foot is swollen and its flesh is doubled in size, its pain is doubled as well
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the mistress has grasped the foot and gently rolls it back and forth, and while doing so facilitates the procedure
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is well-bound and the hand is relaxed, then pause for a moment over the bones of the foot where we have recommended oil and unguents
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command them to move their hand slowly, and when they are finished, do that which is necessary to cause the limb to return to its natural position and command her to lean slightly forward, and command her to compress it; and make her vomit again.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is ready for birth on the broad side
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they desire to terrify the mother according to this manner, consider it, and do not hesitate to cut the second nail until it is evacuated of humidity
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the foot is suspended over the face and the heel, then cut that of the embolism, so that it is not retained and remains
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And immediately place the foot on the cushion until it pauses again, and command the woman to compress herself with several vegatables, and the sirrah will depart immediately without further ado, if God wills or no
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The childbirth of twins or many fetuses is an arduous labor.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	The wise ones say that when twins are born together with their afterbirth, three or four of them are born at once, which is strange and difficult; for such things are not usual in nature, and they do not live long
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And tell of those who have been multiplied, whether one after the other, and who are separated by the umbilical cord, distinguish those that remain in the navel cord of the afterbirth of those that have been delivered. For each of these vegatables is delivered as if it were a fetus naturally, and so there remain some vegatables which, as we have recommended, are not edible at all
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, you must do that which we have said of the unnatural figures, and take care of those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mistress is cunning and does what is necessary to make it easier and quieter, and to expedite matters, and is ingenious according to all figures as she has been prepared for the imminent danger to health
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that she who forms in the womb from embryos and aborts
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some veins are formed in the major one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and eight. And indeed I must verify that a woman who has had six fetuses has suffered from this, and another has had ten altogether, which causes great pain according to the measure of the wise men
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this must be known by the skill of the mistress that she is strong in that part which resembles that of that which is known to her, and therefore she must command that it be stopped when she knows it must be stopped
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 166
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus, in accordance with what has been said in the division of medicine, and it is not urgent, and you must use an operation with a hand, cover that the woman is of sound virtue and is not likely to suffer from the accidents for which she is feared to be at risk.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Cover that the woman is covered over her thighs and is leaning forward with her head inclined towards her knees and her thighs elevated
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant has a hold of two parts or is bound in the thigh for so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And moisten the mouth of the mistress with oil, warm mucus of high quality and fennel seeds and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And put a little oil and mucus on the mistress’ hand, and with your other hand interlace your hand in the hand of the fetus, and seek the hand in which the nails remain in the fetus
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	E locs convenient in aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet est preparat que deysenda super le sieu cap, et lahoras tu residas les uncis in les vulves de lu, in le coll, in la boca, in le palatum, dejos la barba, in la furcula de lu, in les locs propdas de las costas, dejos les ypocondres.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	In such a case you must consider whether the patient is prepared for this: if the nails are to be cut on the toes, in the heel, in the mouth, on the palate, or you leave the beard, or the tonsils, or in the proper places of the back, or you leave the testicles.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And that you must have the thumb with your left hand, and stop the curvature of the limb at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and enter your right hand at ease and keep the thumb in some of those places which we have mentioned until the cause of the pain has passed away.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And thus pause and remain in the position of the limb another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that there is an equal traction, and not only an extension according to its rectitude
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus be cautious throughout, so that the sensation of the limb is relieved as much as possible, just as it is done in teeth for the extirpation of the tooth
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And thus do in them what is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of the limb is retained, then cover that the midwife put some fat on the tip of the thumb and enter those expected and rotate over those that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the limb is dislocated, then you must exchange the nails among those that are more convenient; and do this until the whole limb is dislocated
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the hand is bleeding profusely before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that due to the stiffness of the limb, then cover that with a bandage; and extract that until all is dislocated, and insert that or that at the wrist or in the elbow
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus do with the other hand and the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the limb is large, or if it has become stiff in the sensation, or if there is too much water adjusted in the head, then enter between the teeth some coarse sponges and open the head and extract the water, or that you break that with an instrument which is called “alundat”, the shape of which will be like that of the other instruments in the capital which is similar to this
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And thus do if the limb is of great head by nature: and that you insert that with an instrument, or that you support that with an instrument as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is burst and is stiffened by the tonsils, then cut until the humidity which is in the feet is drained out<end_turn>
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, or if it does not obey to this sensation, then you must cut the head as much as possible as you are able.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the belly is swollen or is in hydrops, then you must pierce that until the humidity which is in it is drained out<end_turn
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the limb is on the thighs, then the traction of the limb is slight and the direction of the limb towards the mouth of the mother is slight<end_turn>
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is stiff from the belly to the feet, then you must extract that which has been wrapped around your hand, and open the belly and the feet until the water that is in them has drained out<end_turn
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are at rest and you return the head, then the midwife enters the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then enter the hand into the armpit, and close that over the head, and pull that towards the mouth of the mother, and enter one or two nails into that.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by a cautery that has happened to her, then do not make it swell over that; simply provide that you administer an ointment of fatty humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Give compresses; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the limb is on the thigh coast, then if possible is to make an incision: and to administer what we have said concerning the limb alive.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then make an incision in parts, and extract that.<end_turn>
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of pain from the second time.<end_turn>
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your work, then administer what we have said of the treatment in the aftercare, which is what happens in the greatest degree.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If blood flows excessively, then discharge in cold water and administer the other treatment.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead, and I immediately took hold of another leech from her, and immediately the other died.</end_of_turn
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens often that after a long time of posturing on the abdomen in the belly; and when one opens up, the body begins to swell, and vomiting ensues.</end_of_turn
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to care for them, and I treated them for a long time, but the plague did not subside.</end_of_turn
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I stopped dealing with them for some reason of great attraction, and I cast out one bone, and I passed by several days, and I cast out another bone; and I was amazed that in the belly there was no bone.</end_of_turn
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead.</end_of_turn>
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I again treated the plague, and I extracted from them four bones, the woman existing in the thousand disposals of the thighs, and already for a long time I had seen her in such a way, corrected her with a little vomit.</end_of_turn>
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not doubt but that it was science and an assistant to that which the doctor artificially put in his hand for treatment.</end_of_turn
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Concerning the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the bone.</end_of_turn
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	A form of vertigo with which the greatest part is opened.</end_of_turn
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of tweezers in which two handles are grasped, to which two vertigos are attached at the ends of two thumbs.</end_of_turn
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	May this vertigos cover that it is more subtle than the strictor, and be made of iron or of lead or of glass.</end_of_turn
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the breadth of each tube is as much as two fingers and the margin from each side is as much as one finger, and the length is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two tubes there are two adjustments of that middle tube which are already fixed, of which the length is half a palm and a little more, and the breadth is as much as two fingers, or a little more.</end_of_turn
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional things are introduced into the mouth of the greatest part so that it is opened with those two vertigos which you rotate.</end_of_turn
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that which is more subtle and lighter.</end_of_turn
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Made of iron or lead or glass according to the shape of forceps.</end_of_turn
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	And indeed at the end of these there are two such additional things which are sometimes added, and the length of those additional things is as much as one palm, and the breadth is two fingers.</end_of_turn
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the greatest part, then do make the woman lie on her side with her feet hanging down, open what is between the thighs of her.</end_of_turn
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as if you were grasping forceps according to the amount you wish of the opening of the greatest part until the metronome makes you.</end_of_turn
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo which they formerly said.</end_of_turn
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pushing with which the bone is pushed out.</end_of_turn
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of friendship in which the head is contained.</end_of_turn
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps to which teeth are added at the end, as sometimes, and sometimes the veins are made with such a form like forceps, as sometimes, to which teeth are added just like teeth of a saw with which is inscribed and contains.</end>
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Simple form.</end_of_turn
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine.</end_of_turn
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines.</end_of_turn
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which are added teeth like a saw with which the head of the bone is contained.</end_of_turn
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The limbs are affected by the scald, and the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two spatums are formed, each with a head cut off.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercises, and when their number is multiplied and their qualities are prepared, then the artificer must be quick in his work and take more care of his work than of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with these instruments either, for their need is not excusable
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second [tooth].
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second [tooth] is retained, you must encourage the patient to cough forcefully, and then give the patient something to spit out, and strengthen your hand over the patient's mouth and nose, and if by chance it comes out, do not be afraid
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Or if so, take an egg and pierce a hole in the membrane and put it on those herbs that open the mouth of the patient, thus with warmth and speed and alum and chamomile and saffron and mastic and cassia lignea and holy thistle.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the egg, and put that over the fire
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then insert a tube of canewater into the patient's mouth, and keep it there until the vapor comes out to the bottom of the mouth
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make the patient cough as we have said, and the second [tooth] will come out quickly
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if it remains close, order the nurse to immerse your left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of alum, and then insert that into the gums around the tooth and loosen it with that. When the tooth is loosened, take hold of it and extract it little by little so that the gum does not suffer excessive bleeding.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	And keep the patient relaxed on both sides and quiet.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And pay attention to the degree of bleeding, for it must obey and abate easily
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the patient's mouth is bleeding excessively, we have already recommended the treatment with coughing and the egg with herbs
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it does not come out despite all the causes we have recommended, then keep in mind that what comes out of the tooth into the mouth is the pus, and strengthen that with ointment and tetracycline; for that will make it easier for the pus to go away in a few days and disappear completely and come out without causing harm to the gum
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When pus becomes putrid, it emits a bad odor from the head and the stomach, which makes the patient suffer; and therefore it is necessary to administer sub-fumiguous and convenient medications at this time.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Indeed, the ancients already knew sub-fumigation with lead and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument with which the female is sub-fumigated is due to the retention of menstruation and the second [tooth].
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Whether by sight or by hearing.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And keep the root of the tooth grasped in the gums and the wide part over the fire, and the sub-fumigation over the sleeves of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that until the sub-fumigation is consumed and repeat it again
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Care for the buttocks of the unperforated child<end_turn>
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The children groan and their buttocks are already soft and swollen from the previous treatment.<end_turn>
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore order the nurse to pierce the tooth as we have said; and if not, pierce with the spatula, and take care not to touch the nerve.<end_turn
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place some fat-soaked wool on the vinegar and oil; and keep that on until it is dry.<end_turn
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is swollen, take out the egg for a few days, and keep it out until the child stops groaning.<end_turn
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the buttocks have already swollen from consolidation of pus or swelling; then that consolidation must be softened, and care must be taken with the water that we mentioned in the treatment and the plum.<end_turn
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	From the care of fistulas that arise from the joints.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise in the lower limbs are noticeable and numerous, which arise from the groin or in the space of the buttock.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or swelling.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and corrupted by excessive wetness of white or pale color, and some veins are seen to penetrate these fistulas, some penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known as those that arise from the evacuation and wind; and some veins use the patient's evacuation, and they are often ejected from those veins.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from these fistulas some veins penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the heel; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the buttock.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which the penetrating fistula is known to enter the groin and not penetrate, is that you must tell the patient that it is in the groin, and when you do not penetrate with the thumb or with the finger in the fistula, it is swelling.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	May be if it is swelling, when you enter with your thumb or with the finger into that swelling that you sit on the thumb or put your finger on the index.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not sit on that one or if you do not find any cause of evacuation or bleeding or wind, as we have said, then it is known that it is not penetrating, and you are to be content with the care.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the heel, the meaning of it is that it is a fistula of urine and that you must prohibit it from going out until the area is healed by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May be if it penetrates into the joint or into the bone and bruising of pain in the limb, the meaning of it is that the thumb has penetrated here if not swelling into the bone, and bruising of pain in the limb of the lower part; and that from this it is reduced in all its parts; and that it is of no use in this medicine, neither is it consolidated at once.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, it is not a cure for everything, and the cure for those is the work and uselessness of the doctors concerning which they have been forbidden.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that one which is not penetrating and is not old, healing with iron is expected as I shall tell you, and that which I have already done and practiced
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that the patient lies between your thighs and raises the legs within their limits, the thighs are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and you approach and insert your thumb, or if it is in the fistula swelling, put your thumb in place.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that sitting gives the patient pain in the groin, then you must tell the patient that it is in the groin
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you sit on the index finger the thumb has already penetrated by itself without revealing it, or that if you sit between the index finger and that hip or thigh, then it is certainly that it is penetrating; and do not work in that one, for that is not in this healing, as we have said
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But indeed I say that it is well in many homes today.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the medicine for which healing is expected together in them is that you light the pointed cautery with a moderate flame according to the extent of the fistula, as it is previously stated, and you insert that ignited flame into the fistula until it reaches the groin; and approach doing it twice or three times until you see that all those meats affected by the fistula that seem like feathers of a sparrow are already adjusted
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And approach care that is wrapped in borders so that all those meats that are adjusted are covered, and approach care that is generated by medicines that produce and consolidate, and if it is healed, good; but if not, it is not healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the thumb enters and does not penetrate into the index finger which is in the groin, and between that one and the thumb which is very sensitive to meat or fat, and sometimes the fistula penetrates the surface of the heel, then it is necessary to dry the heel from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dry on the thumb, and it is freed from the fistula as soon as the excision reaches the place where the extremity of the thumb was, and for the thumb is freed and released
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And approach making smooth those meats affected by the fistula which seem like feathers of a sparrow and do not remain from any cause
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if pus sometimes comes out between you and your operation when you are burning those meats, then it is better that you burn with fire or acute medicine, because the cautery with fire adjusts well good things: it is an adjustment of those meats that are adjusted, and excision of the pus of the excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, la hora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am outro instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le Marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	e entromet en aquele fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajusta las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no ins mehrerer aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May be if those nails do not have their hardness because of the humidity of those, then take them at a rough or coarse or flabby state of wool, and extract them from the teeth, and then plunge them into the wound and sprinkle over them some fine ashes nearby the incision; or cauterize them as it is said beforehand in the chapter of cautery.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And do the other care for the other care until they are healed
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the limb does not obey evacuation, then crush the patient in the place where there is little biting, and wash it in the water that is in the bowl and let it evacuate willingly when the patient is discharged
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However if the boils are outside the limb, the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take them off with your nail, or that you take them off with forceps, and instill them, and then care for them with the water that has been said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever makes an incision, cover that he gives stitches of it in this manner: take thread that has a knot at one end and enter that through a needle and then extract the boils from the parts above, and make that penetrate through the needle in the root of the other part, and surround the two ends of the thread that are outside the needle with the part that is beyond the needle, and stretch them longitudinally; and stretch the boil with a strong structure, and then hold the thread firmly and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do all this, and leave them out of the wound a little and do not close them, so that the excess of the healing may flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And put on the limb a soft dressing soaked in olive oil or in grease; and put that on the wound and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave it until the box is gone; and when it is gone, care for them with ointment or another care until they are healed
De curacio de fistulas.	Of fistula care.<end_turn>
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Motes of pus sometimes arise from the excision of a wound or for the constriction of nature.<end_turn>
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are ancient and are not of use in that medicine, when you see that they are useful, that is when they are wet and host the pus that comes out of them, which hinders their consolidation; and care for them until they are consolidated.<end_turn
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then keep them moist at a greater ratio than the first time until the wound is healed and is scabbed over; and care for them until they are healed.<end_turn
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the care of ulcers, that is key.<end_turn
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Be aware that the ulcer is painful, that is key, and that you must note red around according to the color of the flesh resembling the head of a nail, and that is useful in all parts of the body and especially in the lower parts of the feet and the toes, and because of those pains you must support it.<end_turn
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so you must cover that which is in the circumference of the nail, and hold it with forceps or with a forceps, and extirpate it from its root; and care for that.<end_turn
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	Or if you wish, cauterize them as it is said beforehand in the chapter on cautery.<end_turn
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	However if a boil is a small elevation rough and round about the surface of the body, and drops of pus are seen in the most of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the care for them is to stretch and instill it, or to open it with thread or hair until it is gone.<end_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Or if you wish, cauterize them as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.<end_turn
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are already eradicated frontally and backwards with the instrument which I mentioned.<end_turn
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	However a formica is a small foul-smelling elevation or large fistula about the surface of the body when it is felt there is an ant in it resembling the biting of an ant, and that is useful around the body.<end_turn
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the care for them is to take a needle of fine awl or a needle of spool, and be strong, and place that over the ant until it is contained by the circle of the needle in the parts around it; and then twist your hand over the needle until you instill the water that is in the circumference of the ant, and stop that on the wound of the flesh, and evacuate the ant from its root.<end_turn
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	Or if you wish, do the same with a needle of horn or of iron according to this fashion:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The needle has been withdrawn from the wound, leaving the opening closed. The surrounding area is enveloped to prevent the edges from coming into contact and causing further pain.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the area, do so as described previously in the chapter on cautery.</end_of_turn>
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the same way as the instruments are administered to give comfort.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some drugs are useful for providing comfort, such as gold, lead, tin or mercury; others are administered with small or large instruments depending on the nature of the ailment, for those administered for the care of young children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are sore or painful, the dose should be small.</end_of_turn
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The way to provide comfort for the great and the few.</end_of_turn
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle from which the bag is suspended is wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction between the place where the bag is attached in this way as often.</end_of_turn
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower part of the limb which is inside the buttock is closed (so it is not perforated) like a lion, backwards towards the skin; and on one side of the limb there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays, with a smaller one for the greater.</end_of_turn
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines from the bladder of an animal or from the skin of a sheep are held, and the size of it is a palm.</end_of_turn
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it is pierced by means of four holes like this when it is rotated; and if the space between the holes is the thickness of the finger.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And so insert into those holes firmly with thread of twelve threads, or more; and adjust as you wish the bag; and when it is suspended in it the bag should be stretched in the head of the wound between two distinct things with strong constriction, and slightly cauterize at each hole: The quality of cauterizing which is best is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient’s tolerance; and take care that it is not too cold or too hot.</end_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And so the patient should be placed lying down on the seat, and elevate their limbs on their thighs and stop them there with a cushion or a blanket; and apply oil or albumin of oil or mucilage of fenugreek or of chamomile to the limb; and insert that into the buttock with ease, and the minister should grasp the bag and express it until two more and three drops have escaped into the bowel until it is evacuated from the wound; and then remove the needle and the patient takes back their limbs to the side.</end_of_turn>
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces this to happen, hold it as much as you can; and if you sleep with it for the whole night, it is better in the morning.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you cauterize that in the abdominal diseases and the swelling subsides, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttock there are emboldened or bloodstained spots, then the needle should be closed like a lion, like the needle which is used for children.</end_of_turn
De curacio de las plaguas.	Care of wounds.</end_of_turn>
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the care of wounds that which is most suitable for the free man, and I say the same concerning the care of those with hands and medicines according to the complement.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are diverse according to the cause of the wound and the location of the wound.</end_of_turn
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which most wounds are caused are various, such as a wound from a stone, or incision of space or bone, or percussion with the fist, or with a whip, or with an arrow, or like those of these causes.</end_of_turn
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the wounds that are in the places of the body are also like a wound that occurs on the head, or the shoulder, or the foot, or the belly, or the genitals, or like those of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the care of some wounds so that they stop that ratiocination and rule concerning the others.</end>
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple head wounds, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.</end>
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when there is a simple head wound and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is from a stone or something similar, and if it has already bled alone and is a large wound, and you fear that there will be a fistula, cover the wound and apply the plaster of Paris immediately; do not delay until later; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the plaster if there is no other cause that prohibits its application, especially if the wound is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	The pain of the joints is caused by cold humors which infiltrate all the parts of the body; and when the pain is in the feet, the doctors usually call it gout.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Even if the cause is slight, do not allow any indulgence, for the hour should be diminished from the wine and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest on the plague, if it should happen that after the cautery some pus comes out, soak it in olive oil or in wine where it is stipped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Even if you are certain that the cautery is finished, rest on the plague, if it is recent and the air is still clean and the powder which I recommended is still there.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, rest on the abscess until it is healed
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Even if the abscess is great or is for lack of space and for the swelling, and the lips of the wound are not adjusted for pupils, the hour adjusts those by suture as I recommend for the suture of them
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Even if the abscess is already exposed from the bone and skin, and is not retained but for a slight swelling, the hour incisions that and immediately care for the abscess with medicines and restore the limb immediately in its place instead of codena, and command the patient to abstain from eating coarse food: heads and brains, kidneys and fat, until it is digested.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if in the codena there is decay and it does not adhere to the bone, the hour incisions all that is putrefying and removes it, and immediately care for it
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Even if in these abscesses there is an artery or vein from which blood flows of a clean nature that does not require excision by medicines, the hour inquires about the artery, and if you find that it is not incised, the hour incisions it with a sponge or ligature; and if necessary you must provoke that which we have said must not be eaten, the hour cauterizes until the blood is evacuated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these abscesses are simple and small, the cause of them is slight; even if you powder over those very powders, which solidify when the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take part olive oil, two parts blood of a virgin, three parts non-extinct alum, mix them all together and grind them, and let the abscess be full of them, and keep it compressed by good constriction until it sticks to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.</end_turn>
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And immediately strengthen that which comes out with the powders and read that, and do not remove it while it is still moist, because it is not driven out by medicine until it is healed.</end_turn>
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And every time that you do this alone, when I am not in your presence oil and blood of a virgin.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And I have already performed this operation in great abscesses when you considered that it should be delayed over those and that they are stretched, and only in recent abscesses where their blood has not been altered.</end_turn
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if their blood has been altered, and especially when it is in summer, the hour does not understand the position of this powder, however, I advise that you care for those with water which we have said, or that you care for those with barley flour and water until the swelling goes down; and immediately care for them with the other care until they are healed.</end_turn
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Even if in the abscess there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, the hour extracts that with the hand.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the care of the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.</end_turn
De las plaguas del col.	Of the abscesses of the knee.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Even if the abscess occurs in the knee, the hour is no different in its treatment, and between the abscess of the head when it is simple.</end_turn><end_turn>
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Even if the nerves of the knee are incised or an artery, the hour if it is a nerve, it is not in its engineering but that it is avoided care of them with water which makes gentle stypticity, as with vinegar and celery which is old and resembles them because it does not touch the nerves and relaxes that.</end_turn><end_turn>
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not rest over any cause of all coolness, for the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of them is at the brain, which is the most important of all the members.</end_turn><end_turn
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If it appears that the ailment is not curable by medicines, thus when the cause is washed out by water, every vegetable matter infused in olive oil, roasted or unroasted, and then when washed out by water again and the other small stones are removed according to this manner, and humi is added.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the plague is great, then administer sutures, or bind the edges of the wound, and indeed cure that which is within with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the plague is deep or accidental at the lower part, then pierce that in the area most depressed
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the plague the artery has already been cut and the blood flow has become healthy, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spondylitis of the groin has already been incised and all, and the veins of the thigh have been preserved, then you adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the thigh of the groin and do not touch that; elevate that and reduce that to its natural figure, and strengthen that which is stretched downwards, and rest that for several days; and indeed cure that which is infected with swelling and inflammation until it is healed
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already affected the bones in price, then pierce that, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all of those that you can from it; and what remains, rest that until the plague has subsided, and be separate and relieved of it
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle on that powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the plague there is a fistula, then cure that with water from which the memory will soon be taken away in the head
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the thigh or of similar ones when there is pain between the bones and is caused by space or by swelling or by stretching or by similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of the thigh or of the hip, and sometimes of the depth of the wound, then consider more if it is the plague which has been produced by excessive heat; the doctor must know that the plague is deadly
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is not depth and the plague is recent at the surface of the limb, then you wait in it for the first hour to sprinkle, and do not strengthen that lest it be retained in the depth of the wound and return to the head and cause the disease to worsen; rather wait in it until it is attracted, and loosen that two vegetables a day.</start_of_turn>
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the vomit is not at your present, then you wait in the orifice of the plague until it is cold because of the moisture; and make the patient sleep over the plague so that it runs out what is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If already of the plague more than three days have passed or more, and no spasm or tremor of the limb or bad stiffness results from it, and sometimes the other good symptoms of it, then indeed the plague is saved; and indeed cure that which is cold and the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the recovery from it is excused, and already all the time is open, then indeed the fistula is already finished; cure therefore that for the head of the limb.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is by incision of space or hip, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the thigh, then cure that with water which precedes the suture, if it is great, or with powder if it is small.</start_of_turn>
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If already in the bones there has been price, and so already has been cut pieces, then you extract the plague and cover to extract those pieces, if they are separated.</start_of_turn>
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then rest until the plague has subsided, for the extraction of them is alleviated.</start_of_turn
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for the other plagues that happen in the other members, the help in their cure is the help of the water that has been said.</start_of_turn
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the belly plagues.</start_of_turn
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which happens in the belly is either great, or little, or mild.</start_of_turn
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many vegetables there are some which cause the budel or nerves of the belly to be affected, because of the excessive introduction of them and the suture of them to be more harsh and subtle.</start_of_turn
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a slight wound is difficult for another way, and if you do not protect yourself from the introduction of them into the limb as much as possible, it swells and becomes difficult because the instrument of them is already finished.</start_of_turn
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best disruption is milder, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is easier, just as it is in the two preceding species mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You are right, the next sentence is:
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other sutures are sufficient for the other wounds, but in the case of the intestine suture these are usually the most proper
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend that you take care of any exposed parts and declare them
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is no cause for the hernia to exist, and when it is difficult to reduce it, the hour is in two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or because the hernia is caused by cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore when it is like this, the hour is that you cover that area with a sponge moistened with warm water, or that you soak with vinegar, saffron, pepper, and cloves until the inflammation has subsided
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some herbs make the water in which they have been steeped more effective for the reduction of inflammation. It is better than plain water for resolving the inflammation.</start_of_turn>
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore when the inflammation has subsided, the hour is to moisten the hernia with warm water in which salt and mallow have been soaked, because this alleviates the pain of the intestine due to little cause.</start_of_turn>
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the intestine has been freed from the adhesion, this treatment should be omitted. The hour is to cut the disruption with a small instrument that has been soaked in lard, which will leave no scars.</start_of_turn>
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is better when it is appropriate, that is, without being excessive, and does not require excessive drying.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Then describe the instrument in shape.</start_of_turn
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part is sharp, the other is not, and the handle is thick, not blunt, with a slightly obtuse tip.</start_of_turn
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore when the wound is large and the hernia is coming out, the hour is to reduce it according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible over the intestine, because that is better.</start_of_turn
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Moreover when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, the hour is to place the patient on their side, and to suspend their legs higher than the chest; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, the hour is to suspend the chest and the legs more than the lower parts.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is on one side of the abdomen, the hour is to stop your attention and your thoughts for a moment so that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other.</start_of_turn
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And also that you administer water in the large wounds and in the smaller wounds.</start_of_turn
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small wounds, stop the water that you have prepared and give it between your greatest wounds, which have the whole disruption in their hand and adjust their lips, and take away from that which if necessary causes another suture.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture technique: you grasp the needle or the needle handle according to the width of the wound; and you leave the tip of the disruption from the ring finger, and you tighten the needle one or two times so that you do not leave the knot at the bottom of the wound, between the two extremities of the codena, until you have pierced through that part; and you have already added two extremities of the codena and two extremities of the ciphac, and so there are four in total.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten the knot firmly double in the circuit of the needle, and mix some herbs from two parts together, and add the two lips and the wound together to make it stronger; and leave the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that place, and tie that one to the first needle as tightly as the first; and do not stop until the whole contraction of the wound has been completed.</start_of_turn
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the fine needles between thickness and thinness, because the fine needles do not bite too aggressively; and the thick ones are difficult to handle in the codena, and therefore because of this it is necessary that they be handled in thinness and thickness.</start_of_turn
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be fixed at both extremities of the codena too much, so that the flesh is not bitten too aggressively and that the wound does not open before its consolidation.</start_of_turn
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the sutures too much, so that the wound is not hindered in its consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And take out the ends of the needles so that they do not irritate the patient's wound; and leave the sutures loose from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you believe that the wound has already consolidated.</end_of_turn>
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And such fine sutures with needles held in this manner are more convenient for small wounds, where there is only one or two needles or around those.</end_of_turn>
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	More commonly, a second suture is administered: and that you administer the suture at four extremities, the shoulder and two extremities of the armpit, together, with one needle in which be faithful envolopat engual in substance and size.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that middle part from which you began, so that the faithful thread retracts box from the lower part to the wound, so that the suture is as strong as the other which is to the cloth.</end_of_turn
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the middle finger.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is for men.</end_of_turn
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And such a suture was enough to cure the wound which had occurred in a man in his belly which was affected by a wound caused by a nail, and was the disruption of the greatest wound of a palm, and was seen from the buttocks around two palms of the heel and was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and when I had reduced it, the wound had been outside for xxx hours.</end_of_turn
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated within fifteen days or so, and it healed that way; and thus I saw for a month, and it is reported that it has healed completely.</end_of_turn
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had given up that it would not heal; and by a miracle, behold, it healed without any other treatment, except that I kept the wound covered with two layers of cloth every day and I washed it diligently with honey water until it healed.</end_of_turn
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I say two kinds of sutures are proper according to the narration of Paraula.</end_of_turn
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And that you begin with a suture of the shoulder, and enter the needle from the back part to the front part.</end_of_turn
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates the shoulder and in that middle lacerate according to the rule and in length throughout the body, and leave the extremity of the armpit in which you have introduced the needle; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back to the front in the other extremity of the limb.</end_of_turn
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have finished that penetration, the hour comes to make that penetration once more in that middle limb from the back to the front; and leave the armpit extremity that is in this wound, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the back to the front.</end_of_turn
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate thus the needle in that way that you make penetrate it in the armpit in the limb in the part of the body where all those penetrate.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And thus begin from this middle side and go to that extremity of the armpit in the other side, and extract the needle from the shoulder which has penetrated, and then reduce that in that shoulder and fix the limb of the armpit which is in the other side to this limb; and extract that from the shoulder which is part of it.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another time, and do this once more about another time until you have completed all that is before according to that example.</end_of_turn
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this way of suturing is that you sew with thread of the same kind as the one with which you sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the armpit one palm from the part of the shoulder, and that you leave the other palm until it is finished.</end_of_turn
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second kind of proper suture which I say is excellent for women is as follows: you must sew according to the same custom as the doctors who sew it, in such a way that you add every part to its proper part; and press the limb of the armpit to the other limb and the limb of the body to the other limb, which is done as I have recommended to you.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Since you have kept the needle in the limb at your will from the front part, make it penetrate to the back part in this way, and leave two armpits; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two armpits.</end_of_turn
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And thus rotate those cascunas, and make penetrate any part of the thumb into the part of the little finger at two extremities of the mirror or as much as in the side opposite.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than the common loose stitching, and is a stitching from which memory proceeds.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And I tell you this, a belly stitch is rectified with two needles, so that you enter into these with any thread, and begin with the needle that is farthest from you, and make that penetrate into the other side following the manner of those which hold the guts firmly together.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching of it is more difficult than that of the other parts of the belly.</end_of_turn>
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More important than the treatment of the plague is the treatment of the other plagues.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you become conscious of the recent plague in the air, the air itself changes that, and reduces the swelling and boils that accompany it adequately, and then stops over that dusty powder.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then stop over that thick liquid which is at your presence until it has become like hard stone and has closed the wounds, and has solidified; and then care for that as for the care of the other plagues until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines at your disposal, then stop over that for the time being, because it begins to vomit bile, cough blood, and change two meals a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you must not take any other medicine in large quantities when the plagues are simple.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the plague communicates by wound to the principal members, then cover that with honey-soaked linen in quality oil of rosemary, or in sweet oil, and stop that in the circle of the places which are between the armpits and leave the rest covered.</end_of_turn
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your buttocks, when many meals have been eaten, then crush that with a black vinegar plaster, especially if the discharge is purulent and penetrates the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that the one that is of the large intestine is easier to heal than that which is in the small intestines.</end_of_turn
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the gut which is called “gegunu” does not receive the healing of the plague like the rest; and this is because of the great multitude of veins which are in it and for the greatness of it, and for the subtlety of the body of that, and for its proximity to nerves.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you have recently obtained it, reduce that according to your custom which you reduce the swelling of the guts adequately.</end_of_turn
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed to the space and has already become green or black, then strengthen that thread over the place that is degraded by it, so that there comes a flow of health, because there are veins and arteries in the cloth.</end_of_turn>
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And thus it is necessary to say that another ligament must be taken, and stop two extremities of the thread pending from the part from which the plague has departed, so that over you there may be relief from the attraction of it due to the loosening of the fabric and the emission of the vomit of the plague.</end_of_turn
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering the plagues when they happen in the gut.</end_of_turn>
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the gut and is slight, it is possible that it is only temporary in thick liquid, to help so that you see that which was affected by the plague in the belly is now in the left side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and had made fistula, and egesis of it is its management and expulsion.</end_of_turn
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And thus I follow the treatment of it already, even though I did not have confidence in the healing of it, but I cease to subtilize when it is healed and the place is consolidated.</end_of_turn
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I have seen that when the place is already consolidated, time passes over the illness that you have suspected about it in the belly; and do not think of any other mishap that has happened and remain in your thousand anxieties eating and drinking, and approach in bath and exercise in your saying.</end_of_turn
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And I have heard from experienced people that when the plague is in the gut, and is slight, it is necessary to tie it up according to this manner: take large peppercorns; and having adjusted the two lips of the plague, place one peppercorn at the entrance of the mouth over the two lips of the plague; and when you take hold of these and stretch out your mouth, the head of the plague will break off, which adheres and is not dissolved.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And immediately stop another bleeding from the first one, and do not cease until another bleeding stops at the same rate as the first.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And immediately reduce the swelling and pain; and keep those extremities included in the swelling within the gut until the swelling has disappeared; do not cause any further harm to the patient.</end_of_turn>
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And indeed it is possible that the gut is adhered to the surrounding fat which is the cause of the gut of the beasts that are attached to it; for it is more like a needle. And that you take hold of these fat tissues of the gut, and that you do not tear them, and that you bind them together with a ligature, covering them with a covering, and that you introduce that ligature through needles and sew them up again.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And such a stitching of these wounds is nothing other than by way of hope and trust.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	May be if the plague is great and wide, mostly if it is in one of the small intestines, the hour is not that of violence but of subtility, and not of their healing but of their preservation.</end_of_turn
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Take care of the wound and fistula.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every plague and swelling, when it has passed its prime and becomes old, is transformed into a wound; and that it is not solidified but escapes everywhere, and is called an ulcer in any member at all times, and we call that bleeding.</end_of_turn
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, truly, is a foul, tough, white wound that causes no pain and which is concaved just as a wound of suffering; and for this reason it is called a wound of penalty.</end_of_turn
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And the home of the wound is moisture, which escapes quickly; and when the moisture has escaped, the wound is healed in a few hours.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And many herbs have this moisture, which is soft, little, great, and subtle.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And indeed I have already said in the division that whenever a wound is not healed or is not completely bare, it is not because of anything other than one of these causes: that it is for want of health in the body; or for malice; or because there is hard cartilage between the wound and the lips, prohibiting the birth of flesh; or because of soft matter; or because there is bad quality material at the wound; or because the treatment is inappropriate for the wound; or because of corruption in the area, which is pestilence; or because of the property of the area itself, as it is in Saragossa for example, where it is difficult to digest diseases and slow in the healing of swellings by nature.</end_of_turn
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all these causes, and the signs of these and their treatment with medicines in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I tell you the treatment for fistula, which is by means of surgery with the hand.</end_of_turn
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that arise from the great veins and arteries, or from the nerves, or from the liver, or from the gut, or from the bladder, or from any of the vertebrae, or from any of the compound joints such as the hand and foot; and from those that give proximity to the main limb and resemblance.</end_of_turn
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, of these fistulas, which are treated in this way, are among the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and are occupied with work and ignorance.</end_of_turn
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of these fistulas of which the depth does not reach these places that I have said, and you hope and trust in the cure of them, and you wish to learn of them, then you must attempt to remove or cut out the fistula, and if the fistula goes according to rule, ask for it.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is crooked, then investigate the cause of the curvature, for the swelling of the belly is relieved and curved because of the curvature.</end_of_turn
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is full of pus, it is not possible for you to know about it by attempting.</end_of_turn
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, glorify the Lord for his works, for the humidity by which you cleanse these others goes from them and runs away from them.</end_of_turn
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire cautiously, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here you have bone or nerve, and whether the curvature of the fistula is long or short, or whether it is a fistula to which there is pus or not, and this is over all that you can do with all your strength, with your prudence, with which you question the patient, with which you ask about the pain, and the invention of the pain due to your compression with your hand over the area, and the resemblance of the symptoms and the causes of the swelling.</end_of_turn
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	E when thou art stood over all those causes art thou at rest: then go to the cure according to confidence: that is, consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in the limb, distant from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the places which thou hast mentioned before.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula according as it is said in the narration: and stay until that which is in that filtration and corrupt flesh is gone, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or in bone and marrow, or anything else that is there, be cured thereby
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May be if the fistula is of great depth, and is according to rule, then cover that in the prepuce as much as possible, and make soft all the corrupt flesh; and give tepid poultices covered with medicines that are acute; and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which thou hast comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do thus until any vegetable matters have been consumed by the acute medicine that has corroded all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of corruption
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that which was removed from the parts that engendered sound flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Or if it is not healed by this, then cauterize that as we have recommended.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Or if the cause of the fistula is bone, and you must certify that, then inquire about that and dry that as we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Or if the bone is to you discovered and is in it any corruption and blackness, then burn that out until the corruption is completely consumed; and then cure that which is in it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and yields blood as well as before, then know that thou art not arrived at the entire eradication of the corruption; and then thou shalt uncover it further and diligently inquire about it and make the reason and the treatment of it more powerful, and restore that.</start_of_turn
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, well; but if not, know that that corruption is in the profound depth of the body, which has not been overcome, and then leave it to that which does not suffice, but lay aside that.</start_of_turn
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	Or if the corruption of the bone is small, or you are able to pull it out, then pull that out with fine forceps which are convenient for that.</start_of_turn
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	Or if there be multiple bones, then diligently perform the extraction of all of them, and of those do not leave any cause for your strength.</start_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Or if there is any cause of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and deliver the bones.</start_of_turn
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Or if you are not prepared to bear the bones of your time, then stop over the plague that is in the wound, and leave that until that which is around those bones of flesh and ligaments is expelled, and keep the wound from solidifying, and restrict the incision which you have made in your operation.</start_of_turn
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if thou fear, stop over the wound covered in warm broth with olive oil, or the limb covered in Egyptian unguent, or in some other similar salve, because when they are softened those ligaments will be separated from the limb, and the bones will be loosened from the incision, and the pain will be relieved.</start_of_turn
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Or if it is a great bone such as the bone of the limb or the bone of the thigh or the bone of the hip, and what is corrupted is only the face of it alone, then burn that only behind until that blackness and corruption is consumed, and then restore the wound.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Or if that which is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that completely by incision until the corruption has passed, and then cure that which is left until it is consolidated.</start_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you ask a man in his household to stay with you so that he can watch over you and be of assistance in your operation.</start_of_turn
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	For a young man of about thirty years of age, who has happened to him pain in his heel, and the parts around the bone which is above the ankle have become inflamed, and the matter is extended to the heel, and the matter is of great quantity, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore the time must be extended for the error of the doctors until the swelling has gone down, and reduce the matter of bones, and the cure must be stopped until the fistula has formed, and make incisions in all the orifices through which the matter has escaped and the humors of the body.</start_of_turn
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus the multitude of doctors surrounding him for two years, and not only those who knew him well in this art, entered that he should be called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And behold the swelling of his limbs and the matter that flowed from him from those wounds for a great body; and already the color of that man was quite unstable and of a sickly yellow hue.</end_of_turn>
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And thus I introduced the needle into one of those wounds and reached the bone.</end_of_turn>
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And I saw that they all bled profusely from all parts of the swelling.</end_of_turn
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And thus I fainted and pierced my finger on one of those wounds until I scraped a part of the bone, and clotted that corruption; and it was already dead and corrupted and blackened; and a part of the swelling had already perished before I had penetrated it.</end_of_turn
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And thus I did what was recommended to me and prepared from the exposed bone.</end_of_turn
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I say that it was not in the bone itself but in that corruption which I evacuated and prepared, and I had already drained it.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I stopped the restoration of the plague with healing medicines for a long time, and it is not solidified.</end_of_turn
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And thus I repeated the process and discovered the bone again as before, and there continued corruption in the bone.</end_of_turn
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I say that from that corruption appeared to me, and thus I had to make an incision to perform the cure and restore it, and it is not restored.</end_of_turn>
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And thus I discovered another vein there and I did not cease to prick the bone little by little until I had pierced the restoration of it, and it is not restored until I had pricked around a palm of it, and I extracted that with the marrow, and I restored that with medicines, and it is consolidated firmly and permanently.</end_of_turn>
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of cutting and scraping, but for the evacuation of the purulent matter and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, which is in all its hours for excess of useless evacuation.</end_of_turn
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore health is for whole healing, and nothing is in place of the hardness of the bones; and it is good to dispose of them in the belly of the body and restore their virtue; and it is preserved in their disposals and it does not make them deviate in walking or at any time in any way.</end_of_turn
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is prominent in the body of the limb already brought to an end, the hour is that you take a ligament and stretch that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that; and stop that ligament of wool as thick as the first ligament; and then lay that over the bone which is left behind the bone that you are closing, and extend the limb so that you drive the bone to the parts beyond, and you uncover the bone over the place where you want to close it so that the saw does not burn the bone.</end_of_turn
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And stop fasting or tableting lest the bone be damaged by that; for when you do that, the saw is not prohibited from cutting the corrupted bone.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover that the sawing be done little by little over the corrupted place, for if it is in the cavity of the bone corruption does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and forces the closure of the other vein.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, advance one part continuously with the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in part of it, the hour is that you uncover the bone throughout; and then stop fasting, and saw that of the first part where the corruption is until the closure of the other part is finished.</end_of_turn
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be small according to the place of the corruption.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is at the joint, prick that corrupted joint and saw the bone that is continued from the other side.</end_of_turn>
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, the hour is not in their ratio but ingenious.</end_of_turn
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the part of the hand or foot, it is not easy; however, cover that you inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and that you open that, and tell me what you find according to any possible disposition that is at your command, and in this way either the vein or the nerve will be rectified, when it does not make you contradict the vein or the nerve.</end_of_turn
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Therefore you must know what instruments to use and what saws to use to cut these bones are not always suitable according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the thinness and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and rarity of those; for it is necessary that you prepare for every kind of operation a convenient instrument for that operation.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation signifies for you the great study, length, and knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases, which you already have in your mind for your own practice in relation to all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I say to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will find mentioned as simple, with which you must proceed at your peril, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of greeting:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another greeting
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another greeting
Forma de autra serra gran:	Formal greeting of great importance
Forma de ray:	Praise be to God
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Thus be the head of this prayer according to the form of the star-studded claw, and the points of it according to the form of the points of the starfish.</start_of_turn>
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not proper that the heads of the joints should be confronted when they are corrupted, or that the great mouth be wide open.</start_of_turn
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Greater form of reasoning than the others.</start_of_turn
Forma de razori menor:	Lesser form of reasoning.</start_of_turn
Forma de razori lat:	Formal reasoning.</start_of_turn
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Thus be a decent farewell: let him make an arch of his beard so as to make it broader and the sharpness of it of iron, and let the members of his hands be punched downwards so that he makes a bow.</start_of_turn
Forma de lu:	Let us depart.</start_of_turn
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Reasoning in which he has bowed.</start_of_turn
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Subtle reasoning.</start_of_turn
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Reasoning of curved extremities.</start_of_turn
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Reasoning like a small tentacle.</start_of_turn
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The incisor with which the bones are inscribed.</start_of_turn
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The other smaller incisor.</start_of_turn
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The other incisor; this one resembles a a ray, and its extremity is like a claw, and it is exhibited in many places in relation to the bones.</start_of_turn
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The ray which convenes in proportion to that which is perforated by the bones.</start_of_turn
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and acute.</start_of_turn
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and it resembles all the causes which we have mentioned of razors and of incisors and of saws.</start_of_turn
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the incision of the extremities and the closing of the bones.</start_of_turn
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are sometimes affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption for the care of those medicines and the care does not suffice, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the limb without your having perceived any cause, for in such a case you must inscribe that limb within that space which the pain has spared, so that the disease may be driven out by that means or by some other more serious defect of the limb.</start_of_turn
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which this applies is that the limb is black within before it is healed that the fire has already consumed it, or that it grows pale near the blackening before the blackness has passed from that limb in which you saw it and which preserves all the parts; and therefore I advise you to inscribe that limb of you.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And in the same way if the cause of the corruption be a blow from some venomous causes such as a scorpion of the sea or a viper or a worm and of the like.</start_of_turn
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must inscribe the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to enter your hand.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And in the same way if you reach the hand, then you must inscribe that of the root of the bone, and do not leave space for the corruption to enter until it has passed from the bone of the arm.</start_of_turn
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you do not know it, then you must inscribe the arm within the groove in the joint.</start_of_turn
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another comes, the corruption sometimes passes from the groove, then in that case is the death of the disease; and to administer another cause another time in care is a quantity of virtue.</start_of_turn
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	The pain in the foot is like that which arises from corruption within the bone of the foot, and in such a case you must pierce that which has penetrated one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you take hold of the foot, then pierce the whole foot.</end_of_turn>
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Or if it has gone deep inside, pierce the cavity within the joint of the bone.</end_of_turn>
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the bone, then do nothing but allow the pain to die, and let the patient rest in peace.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The manner of piercing the limb or of cutting it is that you grasp the ligament in the place where you wish to pierce, and grasp another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the lower parts, and extend the minister another ligament on the upper parts; and you uncover the marrow which is between two ligaments without breaking through all the marrow; and then either pierce or cut.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And that you keep the limb perfectly still from all parts so that you do not touch the bone itself, and that you bring the patient relief by means of adjusted treatment and afterwards apply cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Or if blood flows forth when working, then you cauterize the area superficially, or suspend your work until the blood vessels are narrowed; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.</end_of_turn>
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind up the affected limb with a ligament as desired, and care for the area until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I urge you to take counsel from a man skilled in surgery, for this method of treatment which I have recommended is one which is very dangerous to the soul of the patient, like a fire which has been kindled in the soul.</end_of_turn
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption is first of all in the marrow of the bone until it extends throughout the whole foot.</end_of_turn>
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man should prepare himself for this treatment more than if he were going to undergo the care of an expert, for the violence of the pain and the suffering of the limb, and he should pierce the foot within the joint, and the fire will heal.</end_of_turn
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time that method of treatment has been indicated for the disease of the thumb.</end_of_turn
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And thus I came to know that this excessive procedure has been shown to have no effect in relation to the practice of medicine, for it does not remove the cause of the disease; and it is not useful in the treatment of the body, but rather it begins to cause suffering in the hand itself from the outset.</end_of_turn
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	I ask you to pierce the hand, and I do not fear the result of that excessive procedure, for I believe that the power of the disease is greater than the danger of the incision.</end_of_turn
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when I awoke from my sleep, I learned that that man had prepared himself and pierced his entire hand, and he was healed.</end_of_turn
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I tell you this story only in order to illustrate the cause of this disease, and the reason for its significance and its efficacy.</end_of_turn
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Beware of physicians who lack skill and whose knowledge of treatment is inferior to that of common people.</end_turn>
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess forms in a fleshy limb, the space of the abscess is prolonged until collection of pus has occurred, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and the pus is evacuated, and the limb is left as if it were a vessel, and the surrounding tissue which has been subjected to this treatment appears as if it has been finely ground, and no further corruption is found in the bone or nerves or ligaments. It is simply swelling, and is not called fistula.</end_turn
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption spreads throughout the limb, then it is called fistula and does not abate.</end_turn
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for this is to pierce the entire surrounding tissue as if it were twisted, and more importantly when it is finely ground and is effective like mercury, and comfort yourself that it does not adhere to the bone due to its corruption.</end_turn
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Or if you hope that the surrounding tissue will adhere and that the corruption will not have further consequences, and in the surrounding tissue there has been bruising, then you should treat that which is clustered.</end_turn
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the soul, and if it is great, and if the limb which is being treated emits a foul odor, then you should treat it with an Egyptian medicine which is composed of olive oil, vinegar and lead, which you should place in a vessel and cover with lead until the medicine has become soft and reached its perfection.</end_turn
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And immediately take from them what is necessary and dissolve it with vinegar and honey; and instill it into that area, strengthen the orifice, and leave the medicine in for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And immediately extract that which is superfluous; and do so until the area is healed and the pain is gone
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And every morning it is cleansed with vinegar of ashes, when it is not necessary to use this medicine; and take ashes of vinegar, put it on it, and do so until you confirm that the area is healed at the hour.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then do this: instill vinegar and honey and add sulfur powder, and instill vinegar and honey with some mustard, because honey has the property of softening and washing away, and mustard makes the area adhere to the skin, and more so when there is excess of stickiness and dryness
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have finished doing these things and you confirm that the area is healed, then instill vinegar into the area that makes the flesh rise up in it.</start_of_turn>
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take of fennel seed and dissolve it with olive oil and vinegar; or instill some medicine into the area and put others that have the qualities that I have already written in the treatise on remedies.</start_of_turn>
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the area is strict in which the catheter of the syringe is not received, then do this: gradually expand the area with a small needle, and stop when it is covered with soft gauze soaked in Egyptian or balsamic ointment until it is enlarged.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And in the same way if the orifice is wide, then suture the edges of the area and leave it for the amount of time necessary for the injection to take effect.</start_of_turn
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the area from which the limb hangs is elevated to the lower parts, then dry that part of the limb that is below because the limb will run outwards, because when the limb is contracted in the swelling of the area the flesh will be pressed outwards.</start_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the limb externally around the bone according to your desire, then I tell you to prepare the limb with the preparation that is usually used for it and that it should not be retained by any cause of the limb.</start_of_turn
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are applied to the convenient area until you wish to extend those over the wound of life.</start_of_turn
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the wound should be of such great quantity as to facilitate communication of all the limbs; and immediately insert into the cavity of the area a sponge wider than the area itself; and extend over other parts of the limb the soft dressings according to the quantity of the wound, and leave them over that area for a long position of the area so that the limb is relieved of the pressure of the area and does not suffer excessively except for a few days once or twice a day.</start_of_turn
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that which is over the area be kept for an hour in order that the swelling that is caused by the limb be reduced.</start_of_turn
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if the swelling that comes from the limb is much or little, or is digested or undigested.</start_of_turn
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And take into consideration the state of that area, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling.</start_of_turn
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when the treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that has adhered to the area already adheres, or has appropriate adherence, then do this: remove it for a day or two, and when you remove the dressing, change the dressing for another and renew the ointment.</start_of_turn
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if there is some slight space left in the area, do not be afraid of the adherence of the dressing, for the healing of the area is appropriate, for in some it is late for the generation of flesh in the wounds, and in others it is useful to the contrary.</start_of_turn
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the limb has been swollen for several days and the limb is undigested, then I tell you that the limb does not adhere; and if the adherence of the limb is delayed and is the cause of the prolongation, then do this: adjust in the exclusion of the medicines, and if the medicines are humified in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry just like fennel seed when adjusted in excess.</start_of_turn
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And if you wish to expedite the healing, take fennel seed and dissolve it in olive oil, and pour it over the area with vinegar that has been previously diluted in its substance, and do this until you feel comfortable with it.</start_of_turn
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And thus it appears in this action, when not braced, that the drug called diafinicon is better when it is cold than when it is warm, and use it; or that you take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them all together and sprinkle them over the warm bath, and line the bath with vinegar and strengthen the sponge over the limb; and line the sponge with the cold drug that you have just put in, and sprinkle it over the sponge and strengthen the sponge again.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some physicians also administer rhubarb, angelica root, lily of the valley (which is a celestial lily) and barley, centaury, and use these simples alone or combined, grind them up and sprinkle them over the warm bath that I have recommended; and use it.</end_of_turn>
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the pain persists and is not healed by this treatment, it is necessary to know that the disease is in the bones or in the other limbs or joints; then you must perform an inquiry concerning the bones or the other parts of the limb, as is usually said.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment of boils and nails, attraction and incision of the finger added to section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Boils are swelling that does not leave the nail of the finger bent from the palm of the hand or foot, and which is strong in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged its treatment is less valuable, or it is gangrenous, and it lets out a stench as long as it consumes the root of the nail, and it is strong in consuming the whole, and strong in causing its corruption to the bone as long as it has a foul odor, and is beneficial to remove the limb when it is rotten, and its color is pale.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have done what we said in the division and it does not relieve your pain, then you must know that you must burn away all the superfluous parts that remain of the nail and then cauterize the ulcer nearby so that the cautery does not cause further harm.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the surrounding parts of the nail have already become soft and begin to decay, then you must know that you must leave the angle of the nail that is biting the flesh alone, and remove the surrounding tissue with your fingers and instruments; and leave over only the part that remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines until it is all consumed; and then treat the remaining part until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the disease has already progressed in the bone, then you must know that you must extract the bone and remove it, for no time is it beneficial to keep it rotten.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corruption and the decay go down to the finger, then you must know that you must remove it at one of the joints according to the nature of the wound, and treat the remaining part until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has percussion or cutting, and there is acute pain, then you must know that you must initially apply pressure to the patient, and then dry the nail with a rough sponge or a transverse section of lint, and take care that the section does not penetrate the flesh which is left under the nail, because this will cause the acute pain to worsen; and if there is any excessive flesh remaining, remove it carefully.</end_of_turn
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Just as it is natural in many households, it is strong in meat, and strong in bones, or strong in nails.</end_of_turn>
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The cause of these is the origin of the joint, or the origin of the bones of the limb.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is originated in the bones of the finger does not cause harm, but that which is originated in the joints is harmful.</end_of_turn>
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	As for those that are fleshy in origin, the section is slight, and you must remove the root with a blunt sponge.</end_of_turn
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	As for that which is originated in the joint, the treatment is difficult; and therefore beware of the amputation of the limb.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the origin is in the bone, you must know that you must at the beginning pierce the flesh around the bone to the bone, and then insert with one of those sharp instruments that are convenient at that time, and treat until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When consolidation happens between the bones due to the heat of the summer or the birth of the child, or by the consolidation of the wound or by the burning of fire, or by remaining in place, then you must know that you must remove that consolidation until the limb returns to its natural shape.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And thus you must stop between their layers of fat with olive oil so that they do not stick together, and separate between them, or place between them a layer of soft lead until it is consolidated as you see fit.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If something solid adheres to the palm of the hand, dry that solid according to its preparation and bring it back to the limb's shape.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the beginning of the vice, so are varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varices, and these are veins surrounded by large veins filled with black bile that flow in the limbs of the body, and their greatest movement is in the thighs, and most of all in the thighs of travelers, laborers, and porters
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then when you administer an purgative of the body of black bile some vegetables along with strong expulsion, and bring blood to the patient from the basilica vein
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May the care of them be according to two methods: one is that it is without knowledge and that one black sand is cast upon it, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all is extracted
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is done in this manner: grasp the limb at the beginning with cold water until the large black sand is resolved, which is beneficial for the limb, and then stretch the limb of the patient towards the upper part of the thigh with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or in two, or in three in a wide section, and elevate the black sand towards the lower part of the thigh until it reaches its proper place, and let it fall, until the quantity that you want has fallen, and which will tolerate the virtue of the patient
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And so do that, and order them to abstain from foods that produce black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment for phlebotomy when the veins are swollen and when the patient feels better
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May the elevation of them be done in this manner: you raise the limb of the patient, if there is movement in it, and put it in water and grasp the limb with cold water until it turns red and the veins are relaxed; or that it is exercised by strong exercise, if there is no water at your disposal, until the limb is scorched
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And so dry the cord in the root of the vein by cutting in the long or in the back of it must give it a blow, or in the lower part of it must cut it off
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And so close the cord with nails and remove the vein from all around until it appears, and when it appears you must know that sometimes that request is diminishing towards blackening
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so avoid it and the cord when sometimes that white thing that is cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And so put your hands down when it is elevated and is freed from the cord, and suspend it with an egg-shaped weight
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And so make another incision near that incision for three fingers, and so remove the cord from below the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And so elevate that and make an incision in the lower part of the second incision must cut it off, and so extract that and elevate that until it is expelled through the second incision, and so extract that from the first incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that until you have extracted that from the most superior or highest part of all the incisions, until everything is expelled; and when that is done make the incision again
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey my order to extract and elevate, then put in a strong needle and double it and tie it off, or put your hand over it and rotate it all around until it is numb
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And take care that it is not injured; for if it is fractured, it is useful for you to have difficulty elevating that because of that document.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that is all over, then pause over the place of the wound with a greasy cloth soaked in wine and oil rubbed with oil that is not greasy, and care for that until it is healed
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the bite is contracted without having a wound at the place where the covering has been placed, and that is not according to our instructions, then you must cover that the bite is over the whole area of the wound and the places where the covering has been placed, and suspend that with nails until you elevate that whole thing
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Take care that you do not cut the vein or that you do not damage that, for that would make it difficult for you to elevate that; and use your prudence in that
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The manner in which the incident is done in which the bite is dried
Forma de unci orp:	Method of making an egg-shaped weight
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not necessary to be accurate with nails or to have acute ends so that it does not damage the vein; and it has great flexibility like a lion, because if it were brittle, it would break the vein because of its brittleness; having in it a great excess of greatness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From extraction of the vein in the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein originates in the buttocks as well as in Arab lands and India, in dry and arid regions where there is little vegetation and no rain.</end_of_turn>
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	It is also found in other parts of the body, especially in the buttocks.</end_of_turn>
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	Its origin is putrefaction which leaves the skin like that of serpents and worms, and spiders and other creatures that live between the skin and bone.</end_of_turn
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the arrival of this vein is that it causes violent inflammation in the buttocks; and in this place it is seen; and from this place the vein seems to rise from the place of that inflammation which appears like a wound caused by a plant.</end_of_turn
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And thus when you have come to the extremity, then cover that with a plum of lead whose weight is equal to two drachmas. Enter it to two drachmas, and note that and leave the lead suspended from the limb.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times as you see fit for the parts outside, cover them with lead and note that.</end_of_turn
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is not prolonged, then withdraw a part of it and cover the rest; do not touch that which is contracted until it is outside and discharged, for if you touch that which is contracted, it enters the bone and causes abscess, swelling and ulceration of the flesh.</end_of_turn
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it must be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the buttocks and no residue remains in the body.</end_of_turn>
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein is said to be in some that it is as long as five palms and ten fingers, and I have already known of one that was more than twenty palms long.</end_of_turn
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is injured at the time of treatment, then insert the needle into the groin of the thigh and pierce that along the thigh to the bone, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefying medicines to the area for several days, along with medicines; and care for that for the cure of abscesses.</end>
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein often causes swelling, especially when it appears in the groin or the foot, and it causes many wounds, and it is said that it is from some ulcer.</end_of_turn
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore care for that as we have said in the division and as regards what has been said before.</end_of_turn>
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the cutting above, worms are generated under the skin and is called bovine dropsy.</end_of_turn
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in many lands bovine dropsy because it is often seen in cows and is like that which is between the skin and the bone, and it goes through everything pushing and swelling, and is shown by the patient's feeling of stiffness in the limbs until the bone is broken and the skin is discharged.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the origin of this is from the putrefaction of some humors as well as from worms and serpents and worms and fleas in the belly.</end_of_turn
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared for its malice, for when it enters the body and is elevated to the head, it causes great swelling and pain, and that is what causes the swelling of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore when you want to cure this and extract it, do not do so without having noticed the symptoms and the appearance of the disease, and when you have noticed that cover that which is over it and that which is left behind it with a strong ligature and constriction, and dry over it and extract it.</end_of_turn
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is prolonged in the bone and you do not find it there, then stop the cautery on the surface of the limb until it remains, and the greatest cause of this is the corruption of that which we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Or if it sometimes reaches the head towards the heel, then strengthen over the nail with great stricture, and dry over it, and extract it; and let the patient take purgatives to evacuate foul humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.</end_of_turn>
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the cutting above, dropsy.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that is seen in various parts of the body, and it is often confused from one part of the body to another.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And indeed, I have already seen such a case in which I recommended it.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a woman in pain at a village, and I found a small swelling in the groin vein of her arm, and when I rested for an hour, I saw that swelling disappear as quickly as it had appeared, as if it were gold that had been thrown around.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I went away from the pain of that place and remained in the muscle, and I sat there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And I sat in the other part until I reached the other arm
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommended to him that he should rotate his whole body as I saw; and I was amazed at the transformation of things and the speed of the limb to limb
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And indeed, I have already seen such a thing in my life following that manner, however I have seen many others who have found relief from pain when their limbs were rotated from limb to limb
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	However, I have not seen anything like that in these people.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that it is anything other than that the woman was old, with many bones and veins exposed, and in this way it appeared to me that there was that rapid movement of limbs
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear in those who are delicate and have soft humors of veins covered with fat
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish the care of them, and the patient has that pain, do not be afraid of its appearance as it has been said, but strengthen your hand over that area and leave it excited and dry over that until the rapid movement is stifled, and cauterize the place.</start_of_turn>
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	However, if you do not see it in the thighs, when you strengthen that which is the expulsion of the limb and what expels the movement, and sing those that are like small grains of barley and like small pills of serapi and similar.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species and the places of the body in which they are cast, because their diversity is that of those which have large heads, and small, and concave, and solid; and of those which have three angles, and of those which have tongues; and of those which have handles.</start_of_turn
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and the parts in which it is cast is according to two methods: because the limbs or the main limbs with cause, such as the head, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the belly, the bladder, and the testicles, and therefore when you touch any of these limbs and you perceive at your throat the danger of death, which I recommend to you in this case, when you do not perceive this danger and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then you must extract that and cure the wound.</start_of_turn
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And from the throat of the servant when he touches the arrow and it passes through his skin, and it is situated on the cyst which is over the head, because this happens by its strong heat, swelling, dizziness, vomiting in the belly, pain in the limbs, inflammation and swelling of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and great strength is lost in speaking and the voice is destroyed, and it is situated in the place of the wound moisture white resembling blood clots, and it looks like the moisture of blood.</start_of_turn
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you perceive this danger, do not delay in the care and the extraction of the arrow, if not outside.</start_of_turn
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	However, the signs of the arrow when it touches the heart are that it is near the left breast, and that it is in a solid cause, and not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of a worm, and runs with the black plague, and if it reaches that degree of coldness of the extremities, and sweating, and faintness; and therefore you must know that death approaches at all times.</start_of_turn
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are that it immediately brings out blood-stained sputum, and the veins that are in the belly are clotted, and the color of the sickness changes, and great breath is exhaled, and there is a request for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the small intestines, and the pain is that of the lower back, it is very great with great heat and with great breath, and it does not move all the muscles of the limbs.</start_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then great strength is lost of the digestion of any food.</start_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the arrow is lodged in the belly and remains there, there will be some wound of the plague, or the dressing, or the intestine which is ruptured, and no hope of recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow enters the bladder and comes out with the urine, and it proceeds from it any cause to the outside parts, and there is much pain in the abdomen, it is known that it is deadly
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Likewise, the other members such as the face, the jaw, the chest, the armpits, the spine, the scapulae, the ribs, the breast, and the limbs are saved as far as possible when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I recommend that you take notice of the being of these arrows, for they signify for you about the treatment of your condition
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man who was hunting an arrow entered the tear duct of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the pupil of his eye gray, and he was healed, and did not suffer any damage to his eye that night
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been hit in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden, and we could not find it except for a small piece which adhered to the side of the eye, and it was a great arrow of the Turkish sharp arrows, with a lion's head which had no pupil
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And thus is the Jew healed, and did not suffer any damage to his eye except for the wound caused by the arrow
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who had been struck in the chest, and it was an Arabian arrow, and there were two guides alongside it; and when I saw that it had already sunk into the chest of the Christian, I withdrew it with great care, and the Christian was healed
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, when more than xxx days had passed and there was no improvement in his condition, I pierced the arrow and pulled it out, and he was healed, and did not suffer any damage from the wound
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had entered both of his thighs, and the plague was consolidated upon them; and when I approached after seven days, I found that the arrow had come out at the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in the belly, and the plague was consolidated within her, and it did not change in her condition even when she rested at rest, and the woman did not suffer any pain in any of her natural operations
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in his face, and the plague was consolidated and the arrow was broken, without any pain, and he seemed to be well.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined to the right side a little, and the arrow was completely hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to care for him shortly after the arrow entered, within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the plague of the arrow was not severe; and then I questioned her about any attempt to extract it, and she did not feel any pain; however, she still felt a slight pain where the pupil of the eye was missing, and I hoped that that slight pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered over the area with an adhesive plaster that has an astringent and digestive virtue, confident that the area would recover because it seemed to me that the arrow had come out in that place, and that it was enough to remove it from there
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accidental damage to the area where the arrow had entered; and I continued to keep the plaster on for several days, and there was no further pain; and the plague consolidated steadily, and the pain from the extraction of the arrow disappeared after a few days, since on the seventh day I found the arrow had come out by itself and I learned of it from the patient.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I discontinued acute corrosive medical treatment for several days until I could examine it, and when I examined it I found the tip of the arrow adhering to the belly of the arrow
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the application of the plague for that acute medical treatment until it appeared to me that the tip of the arrow was visible, and I left it alone for the period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the plague had become more intense, I thought it possible to remove the forceps from it, and I bound up that area, and I did not observe any sensation, and when I tried in various ways to manage the situation, except for one day when I managed it in the way described at the end of this chapter, I extracted the arrow; and I restored the plague to its former state
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I restore that and the plague is consolidated, and the disease is cured completely, and it does not return in it for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend that you extract some hairs from some part of your body so that you can understand what I have not said, for the limits of this art and the definitions of this matter are not comprehended either by the narration or by those who are free
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the learned artists compare it to little about motion; and in what is present they are absent in what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments that must be descended from the causes external to the art when an accident occurs
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that needles are not excluded from the limbs in which they are placed, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the tissue in which they are entangled; or on the contrary of the other side
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is placed by the tissue in which it is introduced, or is a needle proceeding from flesh, is thrown out and excluded
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey this time of the cat, the hour that you leave it will be for several days until the flesh around it is softened, and the attraction of it and its exit will be relieved
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	In the same way if it is placed in bone and you do not obey it, the hour that you leave it will be for several days and repeat that with attraction and movement in every day, and it will be excluded
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey it for a few days, the hour that you perforate in the circuit of the needle in that bone of the whole part with a slight tremor until the tissue is softened by the needle, and then extract that
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the needle is placed in the bone of the head and has already progressed in one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the disease at that moment of those accidents which I have mentioned, the hour suspends the extraction of the needle and leaves it until it has become equal to several days; for if the needle persists in the brain, the hour does not prolong life for it
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is not placed but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and remains in the disease for several days, and no accident occurs to it from those accidents, the hour refers to the attraction of the needle and to the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Even if it is not placed and you do not obey the extraction, the hour administers tremors in the circuit of the needle as we have recommended, and take care of the tissue until it is healed
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Even if the needle is already hidden in the body of the limb, and is hidden from the feeling, the hour inquires about that which you attempt, and if you sit that down, the hour pulls that which is convenient for the attraction of it
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the period, and here it is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, the hour refers to the plague until it is amplified and the needle can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have to deal with those which are long, the hour delires the tissue in which it is placed throughout the whole part with all the skill you can; and think about it, if you cannot do it except by the fracture of the nails and the twisting of those, until you obey
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the needle in any place, the hour uses at all times your hand and forceps for all parts until you make that obey; and remind yourself with a slight tremor that the needle is not broken and that it is useful for your difficult attraction and for that extraction
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it from that of your hour, the hour leaves it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of it are softened, and then repeat that until the hour is relieved
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Even if it opposes the flow of salvation, the hour administers what we have said of care in the head
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Keep your prudence of incision of vein or nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in any way you can for the evacuation of the needle; and do it with such facility and tranquility and tardiness and calmness as I have said and as you have recommended
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you must counteract the needle so that the disease is in accordance with the figure according to which you must follow the movement of the needle in it, for that is more useful
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Even if that is not possible for you, the hour administers what is possible for you for the figures
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Even if the needles that are excluded by the contrary of the other side, or that already proceed from any part to the parts of the outside, or make the transmission of the needle difficult by feeling of the part following the tendon proper sometimes; then you must desist from that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then pull that, for it is useful for the movement.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, the hour your thumb moves contrary to its natural course, and expands itself to its middle, then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise leave it for a few days, and then repeat that until it comes out.</end_of_turn>
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the tip of the arrow is in that, then immediately pull it out.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is caught and you wish to administer a pulse, then insert your hand inside and grasp the arrow, if it is blunt, twist it around until you bring the hollow part of the arrow alongside the tip of the arrow and immediately pull that out.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is curved, then immediately pull that out by grasping it firmly inwards, so that the arrow is relieved by that.</end_of_turn>
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisonous, then cover that part of the flesh where you saw it, if possible, and immediately treat that area with what you deem necessary.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has pierced the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close to that so that you can reach it with your hand, then cut away that part and save yourself from infection of veins or nerves, and extract that, and immediately apply pressure if necessary, and treat that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are grasped:</end_of_turn
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like the beak of a vulture that are useful like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip away.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are various types of forceps, large, small, medium and fine, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and the scarcity of the wound, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of the area.</end_of_turn
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Method of grasping the wound with this extremity conquishes almost like the beak of a vulture so that the penetration of the arrow is alleviated and the pulse of that area is stopped.</end_of_turn
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of grasping the pulse of that area:</end_of_turn
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a ray so that the penetration of the arrow is alleviated and is grasped by that.</end_of_turn
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.</end_of_turn>
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which phlebotomy is usually performed are ...,</end_of_turn of which are in the cap of ...,</end_of_turn two pulse veins which are close to the ankles, which are called the alisians; two veins that are in the two temples that appear; and two veins that are in two holes of two nails which are called the aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the face, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two veins that are in the cheek; and two veins that are in the lips; and two veins that are in the chin; and these are called the algelic veins; and there are two veins that are on the tongue.</end_of_turn
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the armpits are worth .v.;</end_of_turn because one of them is a cephalic vein, and it is on the outside; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is blind, and is a minor vein, and is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalic; and they call that "the vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein that is stopped in the domestic lap, and is called "citillar", and they call that "the belly vein"; and the brachial vein, which is stopped over the elbow, and that is phlebotomized, and that appears on the elbow for its appearance; and the ulnar vein, which is between the thumb and the little finger, and is in them two branches.</end_of_turn
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is that which is beyond the curvature of the nail of the outside; and the second is saphenous, the place of which is beyond the ankle of the domestic lap; and the sciatic vein, the place of which is beyond the ankle of the outside; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.</end_of_turn
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The help of the veins that are close to the ankles is to stop ancient catarrh, emigration, saffranemia and ulcers of the head that are old evils.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that is that it should be rapid from the head of the patient, and should be frequent from the head of the patient in the occipital region where both veins are close to the ankles in two depressed places of the head; and that you should hold the patient's hand there, and if you feel faint from those, here you should take hold of the hand.</end_of_turn
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand over the vein and the groin to the parts below and pierce the vein at the point where it is most likely to enter.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around as much as you wish; and do it quickly as much as you will
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And immediately apply pressure with powder and leave that until it is healed
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And thus it is done with the beginning of the treatment of the wound and its cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two veins and arteries that are at the temples help in the treatment of phlebitis than the ancient emigration, and so bad edema and obstruction of the bile and acute swelling of the humors.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebtomy in these is as you will recommend to me: constrict the patient's body until the two veins are clearly seen to be present and to feel their pulsation; and when you have done so, then do as you please.</start_of_turn>
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And raise the groin over the vein to the parts below and introduce the phlebotomy needle through the skin, and elevate the vein up there; and pierce it just as you did with the other two veins; and do as much of the treatment as you require.</start_of_turn>
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And remove the dressing from the patient, and stop the bleeding over the vein for an hour, and then place your hand over that area and apply pressure with powder and hold that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And thus is completed the reminder of the wound, and of the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the treatment.</start_of_turn
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the benefit of phlebotomy from the vein of the front is similar to that of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration, swelling and ulcerous wounds.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy in these is as you will recommend to me; so that the patient grasps their body with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called forceps of which this is the form.</start_of_turn
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the bleeding immediately at the point where the forceps are placed over the vein and pierce it at an angle or in any other way you wish; and allow the blood to flow as much as you wish; and then remove the puncture from the patient and hold that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some veins are opened by phlebtomy, but it does not mean that the phlebtomy is of acute extremity just as the others; for it is of remote extremity, and phlebtomy of this sort is when the bone is proper and strong as when the phlebtomy is subtle.</start_of_turn
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More helpful are the two veins that are at the temples than the tears of two eyes for scabies of the hair and for swelling and swelling in the face.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of phlebotomy is that the patient grasps their body with a bandage, and you stand over their head.</start_of_turn
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be done according to the measure of the breadth of the vein, a little at a time, because in the area it is not solid; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, the limb of the body is fractured.</start_of_turn
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And do as much of the treatment as you require, and rest over those parts, and hold them tight for a night, and then remove them.</start_of_turn
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Phlebotomy of the nose vein is related to acute fever and violent sweating, and to the maladies of the face and emigration and swelling that occur in the face, and especially when it is ancient.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of phlebotomy in these is that the patient grasps their body with their left hand and takes the phlebotomy needle from the root of the nose straight up to the middle of the face according to the ruler, for the vein does not appear to be present here, and the blood begins to flow immediately.</start_of_turn
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Be careful that you do not do the phlebotomy too quickly and gradually decrease the bleeding as you see fit; and leave that for a night, for it is restored immediately.</start_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrates every part of the body, and when it affects the feet, doctors usually call it gout.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the inflammation of those [guideglands] is that the patient groans without any reason at the limit of their ability; and let the artificer be placed over the head of the patient, and let the patient sit on a chair.</end_turn>
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And so, with the inflammation, draw out the vein along with the ample small one little by little; and extract according to the time or as often as necessary, and make it seem like the other vein.</end_turn
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And so, remove the ligament and tighten the two veins more closely so that the patient does not suffer further, and leave inside until the plague is healed.</end_turn
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The inflammation of the veins brings relief of small boils, pus-filled abscesses of the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the area of the eyes.</end_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the inflammation of those is that it makes the patient vomit immediately, strengthens the neck of the patient with a bandage, and lets the lips swell up; and let two veins be ligated, one from the right lip and the other from the left lip. The sign of each is the blackness of each of both, and more so in the area of those two veins there are many small black veins; and thus proceed with each one individually.</end_turn>
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is any doubt, leave it to me, and do not know which one of those it is. Then you will understand at the time of incision of the greater of those, and from the discharge of pus from those.</end_turn>
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it seem like the two veins that are in the lips outside.</end_turn
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is more common for me to ligate the two veins that are in the lip outside.</end_turn
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More useful for the tongue is the inflammation of the cephalic vein towards the affections that are in the gullet, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.</end_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of extracting those is that it follows the patient between the legs while he is sweating, raises the tongue, and lets go of the tongue from the root of the vein on one side and from the root of the vein on the other side, and the color of each is turning pale.</end_turn
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And so extract each one; and take care that you do not touch the artery with your hand while extracting those.</end_turn><end_turn>
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are extracted in the groin are usually in all men. The extraction of these is useful in two ways: either by making a small incision or by cutting off the vein with a needle; or by cautery with an olive oil swab, and this is the way to do it.</end_turn><end_turn>
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is what agrees with section and with those other substances, according to the breadth of the veins and according to the stricture of those.</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of small incision:</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	both at the same time as often as possible, and you are to open the large veins that are full of apparent fat, and those that contain thick blood clots.</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of cautery with an olive oil swab:</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This cautery is of less breadth and of little pus at the extremity, and it is suitable for the extraction of small veins that contain thick blood clots.</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The greatest benefit of the basilica vein is that it is one of the three veins: from which you extract the blood of the affections that are left in the gullet and the neck, and from which you take the blood from the feet and the belly.</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And so tell the phlebotomist, when you are performing that extraction, that he should guard well that vessel and be overly cautious in that place, because if he makes a mistake and touches the artery during the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cause blood to flow, so that you must not phlebotomize that one with a pungent phlebotomy, but rather by cutting off the blood supply as is proper.</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the swelling does not subside visibly, then lay the hand that you wish to save over that which you wish to move to the other side, or seek some twig or the like; or that you perform the procedure at the end of the arm where the swelling is evident; then cut away that which is inflamed in such a way as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform lithotomy of the bladder, then first loosen the bandage of the arm that touches the groin as far as the groin itself; and then take hold of the limb and hold it firmly; then cut the vein with a concave incision at the point of inflammation, and hold it so that the bleeding stops.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as I have said, when the ligament is taut and there is swelling in the place that you have marked with your finger, then that swelling is an embolism of the artery, and therefore stop that.</start_of_turn>
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	When you see that urine flows from the lithotomy as with the urine of a child, then the urine is subtle, namely that of the artery; and when you have grasped and stopped the hand mentioned above for a long distance, then stop the hand mentioned, and if the urine is exuded, since the veins have been cut, grasp the arm and leave that.</start_of_turn>
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Beware of the patient's urine, and do not fear it too much, for it will heal within a few days.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the urine does not stop bleeding, and you see that you must not use medicine for it, then ligate the artery if you see it; for the limb is contracted and the urine is exuded; or take a slight grasp of forceps, and grasp that, and take hold of the hand and grasp that over the point of the stricture of the ligament and the bones within until the next day.</start_of_turn
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the urine is exuded, it is not good; otherwise, cure that which precedes the recollection of the place where the veins were exuded which flow urine.</start_of_turn>
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The excision of the artery is difficult in those situations where the area of the wound is small and where the ligament of the arm is possible.</start_of_turn>
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More than the vein of the foot, lithotomy is useful in extracting the urine from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a twig of the basilica and a twig of the cephalic, as we have said.</start_of_turn
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Beware of excessive tension in the lithotomy of the bladder, for that is a nerve; and when you prick the vein and find the nerve, you will cause it to go numb, and that is difficult to cure, and if it is not cured, it will not be completely healed.  And that nerve is often hidden from view by fat, and if it is not seen by anyone and is subtle and not manifest, then you must stop the lithotomy at the point where you pricked it and avoid the nerve with your strength.</start_of_turn
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then ligate the vein along its length.</start_of_turn
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The usefulness of the lithotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts the urine from the head and comforts the complaints of the heels.</start_of_turn
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Do it in this way, if you wish to lithotomize the bladder quickly or slowly; for that is the safety of all the veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left damaged.</start_of_turn
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must know that you must not puncture the cap of the bone only at the lithotomy, but rather seek the place where it is most slippery, and do not touch it, if it is not immediately found on the first percussion to be above the lithotomy some fat.</start_of_turn
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is often hidden from view in fat, when it is not lithotomized at first percussion, even though it is not noticed later.</start_of_turn
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the lithotomy of that and its accidents must be considered in their rectification.</start_of_turn
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	It must be known that lithotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health and in hope of its success and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that it is useful for lithotomy of one of the veins that are in the groin, that is to say: cephalic, femoral and basilica; and that it is useful for lithotomy at the beginning of spring, immediately after Lent and in autumn, and in winter when there are signs of repletion.</start_of_turn
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is useful to lithotomize three days after or one hour before sunrise.</start_of_turn
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When lithotomy is administered, it must be when there is convenience and necessity for it, whether at night or day, at any hour and at all times.</start_of_turn
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que Dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquella es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, in order that the phlegmomaniac be calmed and relieved in all these circumstances.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if the vein is burst in a vessel, it is not good; otherwise, repeat it until that place is slightly raised, or over it a little bit, if that place is not swollen.</end_of_turn>
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if that place is swollen, or the illness is spreading, then leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for fear that it will cause further swelling.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Repeat the emptying if necessary.</end_of_turn>
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and runs smoothly, and you fear that it will not be enough to heal the quantity you wish, then repeat the emptying in that area according to the rule and adjust a little in the opening, and do so until that place is swollen, for that place is swollen in many homes requires a little more opening.</end_of_turn
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Although sometimes that place is swollen, do not repeat the emptying over it, for that will not help any cause; pause over any part of the wound of oil, which relieves the body of the pain.</end_of_turn
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place to use oil than any other oils.</end_of_turn>
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer oil for the wound in every emptying where the veins are to be emptied, and make it thick and viscous when it is paused from one of those over the place, for the pain is subtle and is twisted when it is large.</end_of_turn
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if there is great swelling in the area of the emptying, where many vessels have burst, especially if that vein has not bled at all or if the opening of the vein is small, then you should cover it, and pause over the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly bruised, for an hour, for it is dissolved.</end_of_turn
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that which makes the pain of that vein more intense with the support of the other vein or of another vein.</end_of_turn
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the place for several days, any blackening or greenness does not matter; and if you wish, pause over any cause of aloes or marigold dissolved, or any cause of chickweed or chamomile or something similar.</end_of_turn
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Many burst vessels cause swelling and eminences after emptying from the basilica.</end_of_turn
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore, put your hand over that, and if you notice moisture, put your compression over that, for that swelling is bad and harmful; and now keep that you are doing until you have applied some of the things we have mentioned, for that will flow from the healthy artery.</end_of_turn
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Do the same with oil which is astringent, so that the place is hardened, and take care of the other care along with this until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that you extract from the vein to all men according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the wound over the vein as much as appears.</end_of_turn
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the vein is black, then leave it alone until it is well; and in the same way if you see it sometimes large, leave it alone until it is subtle; and in the same way if it is acute, until the acute pain is gone.</end_of_turn
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if it is full and strong and has need of extracting blood from a vessel, that the emptying of the vein be increased and the emptying be broad.</end_of_turn
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in those that are pale, do the opposite of that, and cover that which must be extracted in troops, and that the wound be straight.</end_of_turn
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing in the emptying of the vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of emptying is saved from the outflow of blood and the injury of nerves, and is more beneficial and safer than emptying by breadth and length.</end_of_turn
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is accustomed to happen without fainting, do the emptying, and take care of that before the emptying with a little bit of bread infused in wine of millet or of simple oatmeal slightly bruised; and extract a little of the blood from the vein in three or four times.</end_of_turn
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is coldness of complexion, before doing the emptying, give a tepid bath with marigold or with aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or with an aromatic and fragrant bath.</end_of_turn
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If sudden vomiting occurs, perform a flebotomy, as it is a cause of sudden loss of sanity. The doctor should abstain from drinking water and eating fragrant food; use aromatic substances and keep the patient's feet warm.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the division in the chapter on vomiting to evacuate.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And when you wish to make it happen, stretch out the patient's arms and loosen the patient's sanity according to the physician's instructions. The purpose of the flebotomy is to move the evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the madness gradually over several days
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If you wish to make it happen, stretch out the patient's arms and loosen the patient's sanity according to the physician's instructions. The patient's body is strong, so do this within approximately seven or eight hours of the first flebotomy
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	If you wish to drive the madness from the body in the opposite direction of its tendency, it is necessary that this happen on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	If the patient is already suffering from madness and is acute and causes fever, it is necessary to vomit all the madness at once and vomit a great quantity, and amplify the perception until vomiting stops. Because if you do not do this, the patient will surely die from the absence of vomiting, when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	Do not attempt to tear out the arms and evacuate the madness according to the physician's instructions, when the veins are already closed and the madness is difficult to evacuate. Keep that in mind and extend your hand more vigorously, for otherwise it is too bad
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient is bled according to the method; or remains with the acute bleeding of the flebotomy which is coagulation of the madness in the vein; or pauses over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sage, and compresses that which is lighter until the madness is gone.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is clotted, leave it alone and do not touch it until the clot is dissolved.</start_of_turn>
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessary, you must vomit the madness according to the physician's instructions, and it is not an excuse to do so on this limb or in the other arm in another vein.</start_of_turn>
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis of the arm" is bled in the place of the flesh or of the bone, when not found or hidden, which is composed of these things.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the flebotomy of the patient is that the patient's hand enters cold water until the pain is relieved and the vein becomes apparent.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And keep your hand firmly over that area and over the stricture of the bone; and bleed according to the small transverse, not the longitudinal or the longitudinal of the long axis.</start_of_turn
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Let the perception be wide and your flebotomy be such as to bleed that little bit over the wrist joint.</start_of_turn
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of the madness is prohibited, leave your hand in the cold water and let the madness flow into the water until you have accomplished your purpose.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Even if it is summer, you are excused from the immersion of the hand in cold water, and the patient's body is kept warm in cold water in winter.</start_of_turn>
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The bleeding of this vein is more useful than that of all the others, for it has neither pulsating vein nor nerves.</start_of_turn
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The bleeding of the wrist vein is related to the diseases of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bleeding of the patient is that you strengthen your hand over the bone or over your hand, because you have put it into cold water, until the vein is swollen and is clearly visible at the same time; and bleed transversely; if you do not do this, nothing will result from it.</start_of_turn
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Remember that you must not touch your hand with the flebotomy, because you leave the nerves of the fingers naked of flesh.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And keep immersing your hand in the cold water and let the madness flow in that way, because if you do not immerse your hand in the cold water, the madness will coagulate in the vein and will be prohibited from flowing.</start_of_turn
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the madness is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you stop over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified too firmly; and always keep your hand still.</start_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrating the body often results in pain in the feet, and doctors therefore call it gout.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And it is similar to the evacuation of the other hand as you have done in the other case.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The evacuation of the spleen is helpful for the diseases that are in the lower parts of the body, such as those of the belly, and also for retention of menses, and for the diseases of the tonsils, ulcers of cavities and ancient wounds, and for their resemblance to other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the evacuation of the spleen is that it throws the whole foot into cold water and makes over that friction within which the veins appear; and it is bound over the ankle joint; and the place of the vein appears to be swollen, and from that so branch out on the surface of the foot many veins that rise up like ramps.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, if the phlebotomy is done abundantly, or if you leave the wound open over the swelling, that is better and safer
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you evacuate that one on the surface of the foot, then you must take care of the nerves that are under that one on the surface of the foot, and stop your evacuation when you have gone through as much as you would like to insert it
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Therefore, be careful with the phlebotomy.<end_turn>
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden for you to do the work of the sanctity; however, you must repeat the evacuation of the foot in cold water and let the sanctity run in that within which it is evacuated.<end_turn>
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the phlebotomist is mistaken in the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy a few times, because the place is safe; and do not be afraid of it, but take care of the nerves as we have said.<end_turn
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it is similar to the evacuation of the other foot equally.<end_turn>
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is over the heel towards the side of the heel.<end_turn
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The evacuation of the spleen is helpful for the ankle when it is for the safety of the cut.<end_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the evacuation of the spleen is that the disease comes in bath, and that it tightens and strengthens the belly of the foot from the side of the ankle to outside four fingers to a long strip that does not appear except for water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, then you must evacuate that according to each case as it is possible and according to the transversion, and that is better; or insert that for incision or evacuate that for section, because the place of it is safe.<end_turn
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And this is in most homes not known; and if you find that, and it does not appear to you, then evacuate a vein of it, and that is the one that appears in the two feet rather than the ear and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Take care of the nerves, and run the sanctity as much as you want.<end_turn
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the stricture and stop over the place of the phlebotomy so that it strengthens the place, because for curiosity it is healthy.<end_turn
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the winds and qualities of using those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The winds are of barley, or of rye, or of ivy.<end_turn>
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the winds are done in two ways: one is by sacrifice and extraction of sanctity, and the other is by sacrifice itself.<end_turn
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this sacrifice that is done is done in two ways, either by fire or by fire itself.<end_turn
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the winds that are administered with sacrifice and extraction of sanctity are fourteen places of the body, of which one in which the winds are stopped is the ankle; and the fourth part of the head; and the middle part of the neck; and the winds of the mouth beyond the lips; and the winds of two spatulas; and the winds of alohost, which is at the top of the heel; and two flames; and two trumpets; and two cavities; and two buttocks.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the winds do not extract the sanctity except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by which they do not take the virtue of those, just as is the case with phlebotomy; nor does it suffice that the winds be done by fire or fire in any disease that is useful for the replacement until all the members of the body are evacuated.<end_turn
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessary, provoke vomiting for illness or continuing pain, administer it at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of the month and at any other time as needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that many men are in whom it is multiplied within that they indige extraction of it for vomiting and find in the gut great sadness and soda; and from these is that they find replacement and mucus in the face and gut, and in the gut of the col; and from these is that they find vomiting immediately in the face and in the front of the head and darkness and nausea in the heels; and from these that they spit out the vomit of the gut; and from these that their laughter is multiplied; and from these that they find taste of salt in the mouth, or that the tongue is swollen and spits out salt; and from these that their sleep is multiplied, and from these that they vomit salt in sleep mucus and ancients and sores and other causes remain to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when in any case of these, and properly when it is in the third or half of the month, they command vomiting to be made more frequent than for the past two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And together with vomiting of the nape is that when that confirms gravity to the head and to what is collapsed in the heels; more than that is proper evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this vomiting is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not allowed to use it of those who are of complete frigidity, or in which is catarr, for that gives to that great document.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that does not cover that they use it of the old people, and in the heads of which are diseases of cold.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And for that, when it is continued over this, it is fruitful to forget; and for that we command the vomiting doctor to place his hand a little below the ankle with the windward towards the heels, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And vomiting of ale is in the place of phlebotomy of the vein of the gut and of the basilica: and for that it confirms to asthma, and to the constriction of bile and to the scissura of the spasm of bile, and to hiccups, and to replacement.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And cover that the vomiting of ale be slightly thick, for if it is paused behind, it brings about debility in the body and in the stomach
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And vomiting of almonds confirms to headaches and to ophthalmia, and to diarrhea, and to vertigo, and to toothache; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the vein of the marrow.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And we command the vomiting doctor not to touch his hand with scarification so that he does not cause the artery to bleed and blood flow of salt.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And vomiting of the feet confirms to bad breath in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to remaining of the diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the vomiting that is made over the two spatulas confirms to captan, which is useful for the replacement of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And vomiting of the four limbs from the flanks of the ribs confirms together with phlebotomy of three veins, that is of the basilica, gut and cephalic, for that which attracts all the blood of all those veins more numerous than those of the others veins except for the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And we command the vomiting doctor not to proceed too much in scarification, for the location is denuded of flesh, and leaves them nerves and arteries
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this is vomiting which is vomited over the cushions and confirms to hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to ulcers more behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And we command the vomiting doctor that it be a great vomiting, and that it be of earth, for the location digests of great dry heat; and that many subtle vomiting be vomited and be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	And greater vomiting of the chest slightly shows, for it expels the blood of all the body, and confirms to ancient pains of the ribs and of the belly, and of the bladder; and causes the menses, and confirms to bloating and edema; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two veins, and of bile and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But it does not expel all the body and makes them rush to vomiting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of vomiting that causes edema is useful in that it is like the vomiting of the two greater veins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the vomiting is that it stops the vomiting at the beginning of vomiting and resumes it in temperate succession, and does not prolong the position of the vomiting, but pauses them leisurely, and remains them moderately, and that the humors go to the place for their progress.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop until you see the area already englozed, swollen, and that the redness of the area increases.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And do not stop treating and pressing slightly, and consider the condition of the patient.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For anyone with a rare skin, cover that area with a bandage and do not burn it, because the area is not to be ulcerated
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the attendant to expand the treatment and slightly raise the area, and do so easily
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is pus in the area, then cover with two bandages, for in the first bandage open the passage of the subtiliation to the area and to the moisture of the area.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second look of the abscess acquired by the extraction of the large area.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the area is not bloody, then make the third bandage for it to succeed
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we wish to extract the area slightly or a little, suffice with a slight burn
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a large area, burn slightly more; and if we know that the area is large, then burn more for the burn.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the limit of burning is only the depth of the wound
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if anyone has a large, hard, fleshy wound, and their veins are stretched too tight, cover the area of the veins with softer substances; if it is in summer, thus with aloe oil or violet oil, or almond oil, or poppy seed oil; and if it is in winter, then olive oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or Saint-John’s wort oil.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the swelling is large, puffy, then apply olive oil of marigold, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or pennyroyal oil, and so on
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More if the attendant has large pores of soft skin, then do not apply oil, and cover that the area of the veins should be washed with vinegar or lukewarm water, or with lime juice, or with elderberry juice, or with pomegranate juice, and so on
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the area is moist, wash the veins with vinegar or with water of mistletoe, sage and chamomile, or so on.</start_of_turn>
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the swelling is great, wash the veins with strong vinegar or with elderberry water, which is rue, or with chamomile or fennel decoction, or of camomile, and so on.</start_of_turn>
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover the area from the bath; because it has to be given immediately after the bath for an hour or two, and cover the area with a cloth.</start_of_turn
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the wound does not bleed before the dressing is applied?</start_of_turn>
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the attendant or the one who should extract the blood is bilious and has a sudden pain in the area and inflammation, cover that you should first prevent the causes of heat, thus with cloves of garlic, and vinegar and vinegar of roses, and bay leaves, and thyme, and so on.</start_of_turn
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And stop their meals thus as poultry, and bony meats, and cooked vegetables with spices, and those with vinegar, and so on.</start_of_turn
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the area is cold, cover that it should be given almond milk, or almond meal of poppy seeds, and sage, and fragrant oil between wheat and barley; and that it should be recommended that he drink little and eat sparingly, and abstain from poultry and meat and fish and eggs and legumes.</start_of_turn
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And that in the days of bleeding and phlebotomy the liquid should be more abundant than the food.</start_of_turn
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And that one should stay in liquid for several hours before breakfast or eating, some strong medicine such as musk or marjoram, or alum or so, in order that the principal limbs be comforted and that the area be relieved; and do not eat vinegar.</start_of_turn
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	More, the winds that are to be burned are those that are on the face, and on the belly and on the heel, and on the flanks, and the navel, because these members do not suffer from the burn.</start_of_turn
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so otras que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered in all limbs but only in those in which the position of the veins is not possible due to their small size, thus as with the thumb and little finger; or in limb devoid of flesh, thus as with the nose and ear and the like.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And as for those who have found blood in the joints of the feet, it is necessary to use those which have been proven to be useful in similar cases.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And so they should be left lying down both day and night in warm water until they have recovered; and let no cause remain in their belly; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bleeding and vomiting; and let the limb of the patient be cooled down until it turns red; and let them be kept still.</end_of_turn
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are swollen and the case is severe.</end_of_turn>
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the abscess with a needle, it is better to do so urgently.</end_of_turn
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, let the area be washed with warm vinegar and then covered with moist cotton wool; let it be moistened and squeezed out frequently.</end_of_turn
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the illness persists despite the bloodletting, when there remains something, let you put in a cold compress in the water, and let that remain there until the discharge has ceased.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the illness is widespread, let you sprinkle over it powdered vitriol, or eggs and things that resemble the causes of the disease, until the illness has subsided; or let their hands be placed over the area with burnt barley, and let them remain there until the barley adheres to the area, and the illness will subside.</end_of_turn
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible changing those.</end_of_turn
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited, let the area be frequently washed with the recent blood or leave a needle in the area until the pain subsides; and let them rest, for in this way the pain will cease to exist.</end_of_turn>
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish to calm them, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloe or salt or ash, and cover them all.</end_of_turn
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus ends the treatise on restoration.</end_of_turn>
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very useful in the art of medicine; and is restoration of fracture and dislocation of bones.</end_of_turn
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, my son, be aware that many physicians and vulgar people and those who have not studied the works of the Ancients or read any of their books neglect this chapter.</end_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is useful that this method of the learned in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at any time in my life; and I have not hesitated to share it with anyone, but only after I had studied the works of the Ancients and understood them thoroughly.</end_of_turn
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have confirmed this with experiments and studies throughout my life.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that I have learned about this science and about what I have learned from my own experience; for I have abridged what is proper to you others and spared you the burden of lengthy discussions; and I have summed up everything in the end; and I have shown you in the end of the declaration what means to administer these treatments, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.</end>
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.</end_of_turn>
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of all that pertains to fractures of bones, from which it is necessary to depart before we proceed to the remembrance of fractured limbs and various other similar things.</end_of_turn
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore we will speak in this chapter of the sums of the discourse; and of the chapters which are necessary to understand, for which the artificers and those who are skilled in this art are accustomed to depart from the customary methods and to seek the truth of things.</end_of_turn
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore I say that when an accident of fracture or dislocation or twist or any case occurs, let them cover themselves at the beginning with bleeding or apply some means, or whatever they think is necessary, if it does not impede the virtue, or if it is not possible to do otherwise, because of excessive heat or excessive cold.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let them be content with their ordinary food of fresh herbs and fish and poultry and crabs; and let them abstain from large meats and from fatty foods and from all food that fills the veins of the patient, until they are assured of the absence of a cauter on the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And the time has come to return the patient to their seat, which is where they usually sit.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bones have healed, the time has come to feed the patient nourishing and soft foods such as bread soaked in water, broth, eggs, fish, beef, barley, peas, and lentils, because this regimen is sufficient to promote the coagulation of the fracture most gently and quickly.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Note that bones that have fractured in the joints persist in their first rigor and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the exhaustion of their limbs.</end_of_turn>
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continued according to their nature throughout the exhaustion of these limbs, and are continued and consolidated until the end of convalescence, just as the bones of the small joints.</end_of_turn
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	More importantly, nature adapts and remembers that a fractured bone has been cured of any cause resembling swelling in which a thickness adheres and strengthens that which has been joined together until the end of its nourishment and rest, just as fire at the beginning, until any cause hinders this work.</end_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	Therefore, it is necessary to abstain from feeding the patient foods that are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There are various types of fractures according to the part of the limb.</end_of_turn
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Note that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for example, the fracture of the limb bone is different from the fracture of the skull bone; the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the thigh bone; and so on with all the other limbs.</end_of_turn
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I recall all the species of fracture, which are distinguished in the capitol distinct from each other.</end_of_turn>
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There are various types of fractures in general.</end_of_turn
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	They are diversified by the species of bone from which they originate; for example, a curved fracture is different from a fracture of the stellate bones; some fractures are classified as slight fractures according to their length: and the fractures of the skin and bones of the extremities are distinguished from each other, just as it is in writing when one writes with ink, and there is a fracture with bruising and disruption in the head, and there is a slight fracture of the bone.</end_of_turn
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species there is a peculiar remedy or treatment for its restoration according to what is remembered of its distinction in the different places.</end_of_turn
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of a fractured bone.</end_of_turn
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason a fracture of the bone is known: it is a twisting of the limb, and of that protrusion and appearance of the limb to the touch, and so on when one grasps it with the hand.</end_of_turn
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or pain when touching the limb, and the patient does not experience great pain, it is not a fracture in this case.</end_of_turn
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a slight twisting or small fracture, in which case you must not touch the limb with your hand or compress it; in this case pause for a moment and remember the medications that are appropriate at that moment; and do not hesitate to seek stricture if necessary.</end_of_turn
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Note that when the limb is curved and is not fractured into two or more pieces, as when the whole limb is affected, the time has come to begin to restore the limb that has been injured since the previous injury.</end_of_turn
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If there is a subsequent injury, leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides; and then support it according to any manner that you can manage to elevate and treat.</end_of_turn
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Note that the restoration of the limb and the treatment of the swelling are lighter than the bone from which the injury originates.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And do what is necessary according to what is remembered.</end_of_turn
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Note that even if there are fractures, it is necessary to extend this limb fractured in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And keep the limb in the position in which you found it, while the fractured parts are extended from the limb, so that you can restore those attachments with engineering and according to any way you can manage in their places.</end_of_turn
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Keep your force under control so as not to harm the patient during your operation for pain or injury; and pierce according to the tissue's power, since its companion will be with you in a thousand forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Therefore take advantage of your touch at that moment with your hand, and if sometimes there is some other cause, rectify that and embrace that for the quantity of your virtue
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression, just as foolish doctors do when they make incisions with their cautery, or when they cause contraction in the limb just as we have seen in the treatment of their boils.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And nearby attach, nearby equality and decent operation and tightening of that limb, and rest and tranquility; remind the patient about this and make him squat so that he does not faint in the hour of his vigil and sleep, and see his revolution and agitation, and must his egestion, and must all his movements with all his might; and wait until the limb is in a position in which the pain is secured; for when it is placed in the position of the painful limb or injury, the hour covers that you change that to another position in which there is no pain; and keep in that which the position of them is firm and equal, so that the limb does not suffer from torsions when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightening of the limb is that which I recommend; for you know that limbs are varied in their smallness and greatness and in their shape like those.</end_of_turn>
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thumb and the forefinger and the like, the hour covers that the covering should be of fine matter.</end_of_turn>
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	More of those that are rough like the cushion or the limb, cover that in them should be a tough covering, which can connect the large limb firmly and strengthen that throughout the tightening equal, so that there is no maculation.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And nearby comes, nearby your evacuation of equality, pause the convenient ligament at the place of that fracture with three coverings or four as the limb deserves; and strengthen your hand a little on the ligament.</end_of_turn>
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And nearby look at that to the upper part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than you have strengthened the place of the fracture.</end_of_turn
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And nearby lengthen your covering of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the tightening little by little, until you have grasped the great part of the place.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And nearby take another bandage and cover that other wound over the fractured limb with the covering, and nearby look at the coverings to the part beyond the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the covering and in the softening of that as we have said in the first covering.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And nearby rest between the stops of stone or material which is equal to the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not rest in it for any cause.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And nearby rest over it another bandage, and nearby cover these firm coverings well enough, if in the limb there is no swelling or cautery burn, and the hour rests over it until the swelling has gone down; and let that rest for a few days; and the hour strengthens over them.</end_of_turn
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the strips of the greater part of the cane are of rough race, and be formed wisely; or of boxwood; or of palm branches; and let the width of any strip be like this form and this figure:</start_turn><end_turn>
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But the strap that is placed over that fracture must be thicker and stronger than the others, and the length of the strap according to what is legible to the limb in magnitude and size; and nearby strengthen over the straps with another bandage according to your first tightening; and nearby secure them faithfully enough according to what we have said of tightening, that is to say that it is your tightening according to the place of the fracture, and as much as it is elongated from the fracture, it is better to tighten.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And cover that the threads be thinner in thickness and fineness, and be of lead; and if the threads are rough, just as I have seen in the treatment of boils, let them be of cords of lead during the tightening, for it is a great error when the tightening is unequal.</end_of_turn
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And certainly fine threads are not convenient, because you will not succeed in tightening with them as much as you wish, and do not cover that there should be less than a finger between the strips.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is like that for the extremities of the strips, nearby tighten in those places at the times, the hour rests from leaving those of stone or wicks until they do not cause him injury.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some veins are fractured due to the plague, and accidental disruption in the coccyx, and I remember that in the capital according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And indeed, that all the limbs fractured thus are not straight from the first day; the cause of which is that when the limb is great, it does not suffice to rest upon it immediately but rather after a few days or eight or ten, according to your estimate of the progress of the swelling
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way the ancients restored those with fractures, dislocations and twists
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of dressing for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex wounds and mainly for women and men, because it is of that from which neither heat nor cold arises: take powder of nutmeg, which is the middle of the wheat that hangs between the barley in the wheat heads.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And so be it, but if it is like this, do not burn that album of herbs, and stop the feeding of it so that it does not become thick or viscous; and use this instead
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of dressing for fracture, dislocation and sprain: recipe of asphalt, lapdanum, acacia, enula and marjoram, which is ground from a thousand grains of barley, five drachmas of myrrh and five of aloes, twenty drachmas of aloe. All these are ground and sieved and mixed with water or with egg white if the patient's wound is raw; and apply this dressing, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones pleasantly, and cheers up the patients.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of dressing for fracture and sprain: recipe of marjoram and white alum applied in drachmas x; of myrrh and aloes applied in drachmas v; of acacia in drachmas vi; of beeswax in drachmas xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are triturated in a mortar with the surrounding mortar, and are ground, and are comforted with water or with that album of herbs and should be administered
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of dressing for joints and separated bones of these places, and for pain that occurs in these in fractures and breaks: take a lancet and immerse it in vinegar and oil and apply it to the place.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Note that in this dressing there is no virtue of restoration, of cautery and expulsion of pain properly
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of dressing that restores the fractures: take figs leaves out and poppy seeds saved; contain all and make a dressing of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of brief dressing administered after the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want to resolve the remaining swelling: recipe of broth, chamomile and violets flowers, barley flour, all of which is ground together. All are ground and comforted with vinegar, if the limb is not scabbed
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scabbed, however, the hours comfort with lukewarm water of calendula or with water and use it
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of dressing more powerful in resolving than the previous one, when the accident of swelling is to be overcome for the restoration of the limb: recipe of broth and linseed seeds, of barley, marigold, violets flowers, chamomile, all of which are ground together and comforted with broth or lukewarm water or vinegar, according to the quality of the limb and the degree of swelling.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Ipocras does not say in his book that it should be placed on the fractured limb except for the purpose of making a cautery of wax and oil and not for any other reason; and I recommend that it be more moderate between thickness and thinness
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	It is seen in Gaul that it is placed on the fractured limb after the restoration of the limb and the causes in which it is useful except for those of small heat so as nutmeg, cinnamon and the like of those causes that we have recommended
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pelos de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you cover that remains to be loose, is that you consider if it is not excessive pain or swelling or that it is not broken, it is not gout of its place.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if by chance there is acute pain or swelling or inflammation, then you must cover it up or remove it at that moment, and leave the dressing on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take sponge of lint and wet sponge of marine leather, and immerse that in lukewarm water, and wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved; and then place a bandage over the area covered in vinegar and oil or olive oil, and bind over it for a night until you are sure that the burn has subsided, and that the swelling of the limb has gone down, and that the pain has disappeared
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And repeat that tightening slightly and make the dressing small and do not tighten for your first constriction, and gradually increase that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the burn and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation have already subsided, and all the accidents have already passed, and you do not need dressing or constriction, then you repeat that just as you began with the initial application of the gum
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause has happened to the limb than those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it until three or four or five or seven days. and some days later when the limb is well enough for the discharge of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture has healed, and the coagulacy of the flesh over it has taken place.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust in the tightening more than in your first tightening throughout, and adjust in the feeding of the patient according to the memory of that.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if sometimes the limb of the fracture has already dried and extended more than if you do not cover it, however, you must know that the feeding is prohibited to reach that; and therefore you must give that nourishment with lukewarm water throughout that time; and do it every three days; and slightly relieve the tightening. For this operation, go to the limb the nourishment, and it will be healed without discomfort.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than what the doctors of the fracture of the limb do, another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to the covering, and is restored according to crookedness, is an error according to their operation, and is a great fear, and if it were known that it would increase the complaints in their free time, they would abstain from it
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have not seen anyone who does that, for it is more reasonable not to do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are flakes, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are different, for any fracture is caused by the percussion of space, and the percussion stops all the bone within the capsule, which is left to the bone, as it happens in the wrist, and because of this this species is called spiral; or the space affects any part of the bone, and affects the marrow of it and does not pass through the back of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the sign of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contracted or retracted; and the cause of it is the percussion with soft or hard objects, and to it they are similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which already approaches the nerve which is left to the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the sign of these two fractures is great or small
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is that which is hidden in the bone, in the marrow of the small vein, and because of this it is called capillary fracture
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is caused by a blow or by a fall or by percussion of an object and to it they are similar, which makes any lamina of the bone enter into the parts surrounding it, and is found in the hollow part just as when it happens to the nails when they are struck by percussion and enter the surrounding parts
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it happens in the bones of humors, as in the heads of nails
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these traumatic fractures are like pieces of glass separated from each other
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I command you to return everything to its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I recognize all these signs of fracture for their detection on these parts and for their treatment, as well as the putrefaction that is on them.</end_of_turn>
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary sign is known to help detect fractures, as it is excreted and limits itself on them, making the fracture visible.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Moreover, in the treatment of fractures, attention must be paid to the pre-existing conditions of the patient, and if sometimes for the signs that indicate pain, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, vomiting of blood, diarrhea, fever, acute jaundice, and even swelling of the joints and stiffness in those.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if sometimes non-violent accidents happen, then you must begin the treatment of them.</end_of_turn>
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is that if it is provoked at the beginning like that which happens in the days of spring, then you must study the bone from the fourteenth day onwards according to all possibility.</end_of_turn>
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then you must bandage the bone from the seventh day onwards, having understood that what is left of the bone will be putrefied from the marrow, and that you must take care of the accidents that we have recommended.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the marrow covering the cerebellum, and is small and soft, then you must insert the small fragment and retract it, as I have recommended to you.</end_of_turn
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you take hold of the patient's head, uncover the bone according to custom, and handle it as you deem best according to the appearance of the wound, and inquire about the patient's condition.</end_of_turn
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you happen to see the fracture, flow of pus or soft eschar, then you must oppose yourself to them as much as you can and that you cover them with oil and vinegar, and apply pressure to the wound until the eschar is softened; and ensure the flow of pus; and then begin the circulation of the bone and its reduction.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to two methods of operation.</end_of_turn
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you pierce the bone with a straight incision, and this is how you do it: And you administer another incision, a little wider than the first; and this is how you do it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And you administer more of the latter incision than the former.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you must know the number of various incisions you have made, of which some are wider than others, and some are shorter than others and are at the back of the acuity of their extremities, and are made of iron or steel.</end_of_turn
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate the percussion on the incisions so that you do not break the head and damage the surrounding area.</end_of_turn
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate in the circumference of it before administering the incisions, which are called superficial incisions.</end_of_turn
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called thus unless they do not stop the term of the bone from the test until it is close to the head of the bone appearing like a margin or small circle, which must not be immersed in liquid or pass the sharpness of the bone.</end_of_turn
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a great number of these superficial incisions, which are appropriate for the sharpness of each bone, until in all tests of the cerebellum the limb that is acute is present, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of sharpness of this test.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of incisions: The quality of perforating in the circumference of the broken bone is that you stop the incision on the bone and rotate it with the thumbs until you see that the bone is already pierced; and then you change the incision to another place and stop when there is no longer any thickness of the ray left.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And finally, you must make incisions around the bone, and do so with such skill that you can lift it up as much as possible, as we have said, until you have removed the bone, or with your hand, or by any other cause that causes these tremors, such as nails and fine forceps.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must take great care that the incision does not touch any part of the brain case.</end_of_turn
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, when the bone is perforated by the urine and if the urine is continued to flow from it, that which is extracted must be covered, because it causes swelling and pain similar to that of an incision, although it is more severe and subtle than other incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small bones or fragments remain, it is necessary to facilitate this with the aid of urine; and in this way the wound will be healed with lichen and the surrounding area will be cleansed, as we have already said
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of treatment is light and long, which is called Galen and Lawrence for great pain; and this is its meaning: it is necessary at the beginning to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and have stopped, the limb of this incision will recover slowly and peacefully as a result of this
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	For the lens-shaped part is soft and does not cause any other lesion, while the acute part is towards two sides of the length, as sometimes; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the bladder with the face of the acute incision on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And in this way pierce over the incision with a small mallet so that the bone is facilitated in this way as if it were rotated, and you must be sure that the bladder does not suffer any damage in this process, for which reason the physician must be the most learned of all men and the most ignorant of it. Certainly, if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there remains any accessory cause attached to the bone of the bladder in the vicinity of the bone, it will cause the limb of the incision to become painful in that part, and it will swell, which is to say that it swells without pain at night and without fear
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate the bladder, and what is exuded or remains of the bone is the face of the bone, and it remains in the swelling and subtle fragments, it is necessary to cover that swelling and eradicate those fragments subtly for the reasons for which you have prepared the number, in various quantities so that you can conveniently manage them in all places and more conveniently as you lose your operation in this bone that is fractured and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And cover that you administer in your ratio at the beginning of these treatments, and in this way use more of the soft pus, and do not cease doing so until you have administered the greatest and most subtle of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Moreover, in any other small fractures of capillaries and subtle fractures, cover that you administer with care as to the rectification of it
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is known to all who have studied in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And thus much of what has been written above regarding great fractures has been shown to us
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bladder is rectangular when you have eradicated the bone, it is necessary to take a strip from it according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and put that over the orifice of the wound; and take another strip doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and olive oil and put that over the first one and do with the pus whatever it pleases you that can be done without injuring the bladder; and administer over that a little fat, and do not tighten that until the wound is only as large as the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure that the wound has healed; and then remove that and administer medicines that are useful for swelling, such as linseed and oatmeal, and powder of alum and of surgery, and like those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And make of these medicines a powder that is scattered over the wound, thus as they are dry; and in general, administer in that way all medicines of which you are aware that they have the property of being astringent and not corrosive.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Beware according to your skill that the wound in your care is flat; and do not put anything greasy on it; neither leave anything to swell it up; for when it is adjusted on the bladder of the brain, it corrupts that and weakens that, and brings about the sickness you wish to avoid in the patient
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And take care that in the head there is no inflammation, as is often the case when the care is deficient, and that there is no blackness on the surface; and therefore consider that it is harmful to the patient to cause any accident to the bladder that we have mentioned, knowing that it is dangerous for him in every way
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackness appears except from the medicine that is left out, and it is in virtue of that medicine that caused that blackness, then cover that you take less of that medicine and more of olive oil three parts, respectively And with these medicines apply a bandage, and put that over the bladder; and take care of that which is necessary for the treatment that you consider appropriate until it is healed
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Capital III.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	It is wise that the nose is not fractured but rather split into two equal parts, or one of them partially severed, so that there are two bones, of which one is cartilage and is not fractured, but is twisted and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	Maybe if one of the two parts is fractured, then you must insert a little instrument into the nose and equalize that fracture as much as possible, and as much as the force permits, until the nose returns to its natural shape
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And it is done for you to facilitate this, and take care that you do not cause damage to the patient during this operation for pain
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and you say that it is not going to survive, then you must equate at the end of the ray where it is small.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, you must do the same thing as before
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Cover the restoration of the nose in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, keep it still for six days or until the swelling subsides
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the extremity of the nose a wick of lead, if the fracture is in one part, or two cushions, if the fracture is in two parts, of such a size that it fills the cavity of the nose
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	I say to the ancient restorers that the cushions must be bound over, and must be changed throughout the day, even though I do not see it; because the wick must be embedded in albumin of blood with powdered meal; and keep the cushion in place until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is hardened
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some people put sponges instead of cushions, because it is better than covering it with lead; and that the fracture of the nose is already violent and that the patient should not be prohibited from inspiration
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you do not want, do not do it
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another cushion comes away after the cautery, plaster the nose with beeswax or with fat soaked in vinegar and oil, or with diachronic.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Even if it does not come away after the cautery, you must plaster the outside with dough of the same size and with powdered gypsum with albumin of blood; and place your hand over the nose, and do not touch the nose in any way
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured with a small fracture or with cracks, you must cut over those, and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and close the wound, and care for that which encloses and consolidates, and plaster as necessary
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a wound inside the nose, you must care for that with cushions and give canulas of lead until it is completely healed
Capitol .iiii.	End of Document
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Restoration of the mandible when fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw bone is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by bruising, keep it still only if the fracture is outside and not fractured in two parts and is slightly curved towards the parts adjacent to it. In this case, its sensitivity is weak
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is in the right part, insert the left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is in the left mandible, insert the index finger of your right hand; and pull towards that side of the fracture so that the parts outside are slightly stretched, with your other hand on the outside of the bone; in this way you will equal the height of both parts
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated into two parts, you must administer an extension of two parts according to the rule until the equality is possible
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is displacement of teeth with disruption, strengthen those that you think will remain with gold or silver or ivory; and place a cerot plaster over the fractured mandible, and a duplicate plaster over the molar area, and a large gauze pad adequately sized over the bone; and tie that up as you please, as long as the application agrees with it, until it is not destroyed
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and tranquility, and abstain from eating coarse foods that irritate the lips.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that the figure has already been altered in any way, cover that for the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered and plaster that with powdered gypsum, with albumin of blood, or with dough of barley, because you have already put the cerot on it, and keep it covered with a layer of wool
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another displacement occurs after the cautery, leave that which has been said until the patient is healed, and evacuate that after the fracture has healed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is soft, consider if it is a separated bone or a displacement; in this case you must order the evacuation of those displacements along with those that are causing the pain
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound opening is wide, expand it with the flebotomy according to the amount of the need
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have evacuated those displacements, if those remain, enlarge the wound opening; if not, place one of the dressings that you have previously recommended over that area and bind it up until it is healed
Capitol .v.	(End of Document
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Chapter V.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A fracture of the collarbone is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet. This is customarily called gout by doctors.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Whether it is fractured or separated, or is separated into two parts without causing displacement; the restoration of it is desired; or if displacement has occurred, it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is soft
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in this operation, when the fracture is soft, two assistants should be present, one to support the fractured bone and the other to extend the limb to that part
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then wrap the fracture with strips until the limb regains its normal shape, without causing excessive tension or concavity
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If more extension is needed, the doctor must suspend the patient's breathing by means of a sponge or cloth, and the extent of the procedure should be determined by the amount of the need; then extend and elevate the collarbone and cover the wound with your hand until the fracture is bound up according to the previous instructions
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If the limb cannot be moved from the collarbone to the outside, because of excessive pain, the patient should be placed on his chest, and place a cushion under the muscle in the middle of the limb.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistants should support the limb from below until the collarbone bone is elevated above the level of the preon, and then rectify the fracture and wrap it up with strips
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Even if there are displacement of the collarbone and they are bloody, cover that area and remove those displacements easily
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the fracture is retained in the bone, make an incision in the skin with one of the instruments that you have prepared, because you have previously stopped the pain of the fracture; this is the form of the instrument:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to a pliers of which this is the concavity; and its width should be determined according to the size of the bone or the thinness of the bone
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length should be such as to enable the operation; two extremities are required as many times as necessary, one broad and one narrow
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the wound caused by the evacuation of the displacement from the bone is wide and if the cautery is secure, suture the two lips of the wound together
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is slight or if you fear the cautery, cover the wound with gauze and powder according to the extent of the wound opening
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If there is further bleeding after the cautery, soak the wound in vinegar and oil and wine, and pause over it
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is soft when the fracture is soft and the section is clean, place a plaster cast made of oatmeal flour with egg white, and place it over the wound, and prevent the patient from moving by supporting his chest, and take away the air from his lungs if necessary, and take a piece of sponge from the sarzazes, which is long and as wide as a palm or more; and cover the wound with gauze and powder; then take a piece of iron wire about three fingers wide and as long as the fracture; and wrap that around the wound and the fracture; and then take away the air from the lungs again as before, and support the patient’s chest and abdomen and prevent the patient from moving his chest and his back, and reduce the fracture to its original position; and when the fracture is stable with the surrounding tissue, that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, even though the splinter has not pierced the bone, nevertheless, because of its pain, you must see the patient every day. For when the ligature is softened or the splinter has come out, the pain will cease and the ligature will be strengthened.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And so, having stopped the patient’s sleep on the bed, and having put a little cushion under their chin, let them sleep for a little while; for thus will the attendants be able to lift up the patient from the side, and so the fracture of the collarbone is raised by raising the muscle; or let the patient lie with their arm bound to their chest.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the ligature unless an accident has occurred in the place where it was made, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And so, renew the dressing if you have seen the face of the limb to that which it pertains, and tighten the dressing and restore that which was taken away when the fracture of the collarbone is restored.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in eighty days, and some walks in various homes is useful in a month’s time of that.
Capitol .vi.	End of document.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Treatment for a Fractured Collarbone.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The splinter has pierced the side of the limb and is not pierced through the bone except for the margins
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus, when the limb is fractured – and it is fractured in the middle of the bone – and it is not known except by touch, the hour is that according to the figure of the fracture you must prepare the limb and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way that you can manage.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And so, put a powder of meal over the fracture of bone, and stop the bleeding with sponge; and sprinkle over it a little powder of beeswax; and put over it a staple of wood as much as a little more
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Or if the staple has been left concave in some parts of the area of the spatula, the hour is to fill that concavity with sponge, and to support the staple equally
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And so, keep the limb bound with a long bandage with a descending constriction and with a firming of the staple until it is remauged from the bone.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligature every day; and when it is softened, bind another one and tighten it and equal the staple if it is remauged from the bone
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And I put the patient on the side of the bed
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The splinter is restored in xx days or in .xxv
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And thus, when this number is completed, the hour is to dissolve the ligature, and you know that from the bones from which it began neither fear nor their dissolution is to be had
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the heel and leave the cord, the hour is to cut over it, and hold it, and do as has been said in the fracture of the collarbone in the event of an accident here
Capitol .vii.	End of document
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Treatment for a Fractured Foot
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot has some veins that are fractured in the middle of the bone and these are to be stopped; but the extremities of the limb must be kept clean and diminished
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And with regard to the accidents of the limb when the middle is fractured, that it declines to the lower parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, and vomiting and fainting; and is declared in the cavity of the fractured bone and is not hidden from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the limb is that you rest the patient on the two sides, and put between the ankles of the limb a cushion; and press on the muscles of the limb, and adjust the ribs of the limb to the greatest of two ribs, and lift up the limb in the operation and in the equalization as much as is possible and convenient, until the limb returns to its natural figure
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And so, put over the dressing and sponge and stop over the staple a cushion of soft gauze or cloth and keep it in suspension; and cover that with a bandage; and tightly bind that over the fractured bone that it is not too tight; and gradually strengthen that which is in tension every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that again
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, if there is swelling, bruising, pain, or swelling that occurs in the place, the hour is to stop and remove that, and remove the dressing and rectify what has occurred for what is convenient for the treatment; and then reduce the dressing, sometimes to that extent; and adjust the tension so that it is healthy
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Capitol VIII.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Be wise that the fracture of the bowels does not crack only in the joints but also in empty spaces that follow one another; and from the extremities of them towards the front it does not happen except by that which is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And recognize it is not hidden by the feeling of them so that you inquire of them what they say
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is thus that it embraces the fracture as they say in the manner that is possible, except that it embraces as much as it covers, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a star, if you wish of that
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the bowels is declining towards the thighs, then at the same time it happens to the patient acute pain and puncture, just like a puncture that happens to that one who has pleurisy, and for that which the bone is put under pressure; and it happens with difficulty of digestion, and all these things, and vomiting without any cause; and this is of difficult healing
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ancients have devised in this way that it does not endure.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And thus they say: cover that you stop feeding the patient who brings about inflammation and swelling, because the belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is impeded from the parts outwards
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we be aware of that so that it is not the cause of a greater lesion, if not to happen; and if it has already happened, then it is of help to it
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And I say of them that it should be stopped from its violence and that you should succeed with firmness; and it is like reasoning, however, it is feared that the violence pulls out the superfluities from the place for the fracture
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And I say of them: cover that the place be covered with a bandage that is already immersed in hot oil, and remain suspended between the joints until it is full; that the ligature be equal when it encloses that according to its roundness; and thus be cured the patient with the care of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes acute constriction to the patient which does not suffer from it, and if the bone is put under pressure with a puncture wound, remember about the patient, for it is necessary to uncover the fractured bone, uncover the broken coast, and then take away that instrument which holds the intestines, remembering that it is preceded by the memory of that, and that it facilitates the bone, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And thus we must adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with stitching, and care for that which is done with plaster until it is healed
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if there happens to be swelling in the thighs, then you should cover and immerse in oil the foot and pause over the place, and that the patient be cured with that which covers the swelling in the thighs.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And rest upon the side on which you sleep until it is healed
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the vertebra of the thigh and the pelvis.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veins cause fracture to the bones of the pelvis, and they attach to them, and it is similar to the vertebrae of the thigh
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to some of them and you want to know if it is healed or not, then consider that sometimes the veins are more swollen and hardened and stiff and dead and you cannot make them bend or extend or strengthen them and when you constrain them with the thighs they say or prick them with a needle and they do not feel any pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in this way it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you do that and feel in that constriction with the thighs they say and prick with a needle, then you know that the bone marrow is saved and that the patient will recover with care
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the thigh like that and you want to know if it is healed or not, then consider the weight of them
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then sometimes when they are already softened, it happens to them that which is usual in the greatest, and you must know when you sit upon the two thighs, there is a breeze and egestion of urine that is not voluntary, and some veins are resting upon the two thighs and they cannot urinate and cannot sit, then you know that it is mortal, and do not work in the care of them
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if no other cause is caused by this, the cause is better and lighter
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the care of them is that you perforate with a needle at the relaxation of the swelling that rests upon the fractured vertebra, and pour over it hot oil or cold packs of blood; and pause over that each vein gives blood until the swelling of the heel is relaxed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And thus pause one of the comforting and existing plasters, and rest upon that limb; and command the patient to rest calmly and not sleep on the side where he finds pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the cartilage of the heel or any other cause has already been separated from it, then order that the heel be dissected and that bone be retained; and then suture the two lips of the wound, if necessary; and care for that limb until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	May be if the heel bone is fractured at the ankle and is at the end of the limb, then order that you place your left hand over the heel and grasp the fractured bone with the other hand as much as is possible; and then support the plaster and bandage, if necessary, and strengthen that limb
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if the heel bone is fractured in its place, then rest upon that limb and retain that bone; and care for the wound with the usual care until it is healed
Capitol .x.	Chapter ten.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the limb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are sometimes fractured and if they fracture, then the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and are inscribed in the length and decline towards the parts downwards; and it happens to the patient pain in the area and puncture, and the limb is stupefied when fractured
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then grasp that as much as is possible according to the proportion that is appropriate until it is reassembled to its natural figure
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Or if the fracture is in the length or that it already declines towards the parts downwards, then order the patient to lie over the belly until it is prepared for you the restoration of that fracture
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when it has been grasped, pause over the plaster and then pause over the bandage of the ankle or heel, and strengthen by stricture over which you do not fear puncture of the fracture or loosening of the staple
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And grasp the hollow with what is under that which supports that in that which it rests according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on the belly or rest on the side of his chest
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Or if aftercare burns, then cease the extension and restoration of that limb until the aftercare burn has subsided, and pause over that which remains according to that which is preceding; and then return to the restoration of that limb, and strengthen that limb as before
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Or if it happens in the heel bone or they are crushed, then treat them
Capitol .xi.	Chapter eleven.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adductor muscle
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor is that which is between the hip joint and the head of the femur
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, the restoration of it is in two ways, of which is to grasp the great trochanter with the hand and press it inwards with the other hand according to this fashion:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And there are two ligaments in two extremities, and it is suspended from the elevated area
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a cushion; and then pull out the fractured limb over the thigh until it reaches the tilt of the thigh of which it is an annex of the curvature of the thigh
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if there is any serious cause, or if the limb is extended to the parts downwards; and the physician should place the fracture on the sides more firmly, until the fracture returns as it should
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be supine on the cervical spine and suspend the hand of the hip over the limb; and command two assistants that one of them hold that which is below the fracture on his sides; and the other hold his legs; and each of them extend to his side
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture on the ligament and over that on the other ligament, and each of the two assistants extend their two sides
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then order that half of the ligament be fixed over the tilt and the other half over the fracture beyond the hip joint
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Likewise if the fracture is near the hip joint, then order that the ligament be fixed over that area and over that hip joint
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	The swelling that facilitates the work and is applied when necessary, and as much as it is applied correctly, the hour that sustains that which does not happen after the burn.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If after the burn the swelling persists, leave it loose for seven days, and suspend the lancet in cold vinegar and olive oil until the burn subsides, and then resume the burn.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to sustain the burn that is to place a compress over the fracture, and then put on a bandage over the compress; and then adjust the arm on that support, and put your hand over the buttock muscle
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then suspend the limb and sustain the arm on the support so that the arm is in its place, if you do not prevent any cause of fracture.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And the hour uses supports.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you suspend the fracture with a strap that is thicker and stronger than the others; and suspend between each strap the width of a finger, and the length of the strap according to the fracture plus three fingers from the root
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then sustain the straps at the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your support over the area of the fracture is tighter.<end_turn>
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, the support should be smaller.<end_turn>
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus if sometimes the position of the straps and the support are as we have said at the hour when you restore the limb to its normal position, then do so.<end_turn>
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a burn, then leave the support and straps loose for seven days as we have said.<end_turn>
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all its parts for three days so that it does not happen at the place of the fracture or swelling; or that the diet be forbidden to the limb to prevent surplus of support; and therefore rectify everything as we have said.<end_turn
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are confident that no cause of this has occurred, do not remove the bandage for three days or more.<end_turn
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient rest quietly on the bed, and the attendants sit beside the patient's stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And suspend on the support cooked with full broth, and consider at every hour of the night or day that it is not deformed or dissolved the figure of the fractured limb, or that the ligament is softened, therefore rectify all this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And suspend the diet of the patient according to the order that we have given before, namely that the diet be bland at the beginning until it is strengthened; and the hour cover that you remove the coarse food from them
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the use of the support and the change of the limb is that they should be strengthened for forty days; and the hour cover that they are removed and that warm bath and medicine be administered with the things that rectify this.<end_turn>
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is delayed, the hour does not remove the ligament and the straps until a day or two months have passed.<end_turn
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.</end_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two knuckles; of which one is small, which is that which is between the thumb, and the other is large, which is that which is fixed beyond the thumb, from the part beyond the thumb.<end_turn
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it is strong if only the large knuckle is fractured, or the small, and it is strong if both are fractured together.<end_turn
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small knuckle is fractured, the restoration of it is light, and the healing is easier.<end_turn
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large knuckle is fractured behind the thumb, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult.<end_turn
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worst of all is when both bones are fractured together.<end_turn
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone that is fractured is the small one outside, the doctor must be convenient to restore it, that is, to keep it slightly extended until it is healed.<end_turn
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if the large knuckle is fractured, the hour covers that you pause the extension more violently.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, the hour covers that you must pause the extraction as little as possible.<end_turn
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And keep the figure of the hand still during the restoration of the limb and its extension over a cushion, and let the palm of the hand rest on the parts below, rather than on all the others, and say the word "auriga" lower than the others, and the patient should be placed on a fallen cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion under the limb at its height or below, so that the patient does not strain themselves.</end_of_turn>
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then extend the arms of the attendants beyond the shoulders towards the sides, and another attendant extends his arms in a similar fashion.</end_of_turn>
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should grasp the bone and reduce it according to the better figure that can be made.</end_of_turn
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is swelling in the bone, the hour perforates to reduce the whole foot in the ankle with your art.</end_of_turn
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separated swelling that you do not hope will be restored, the hour will leave it there according to the manner we have said above.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May be the fracture is blunt, and I have already done what is necessary in this matter, and therefore take care of that.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if during the commencement of the restoration an ulcer appears, the hour will anoint a the surface with olive oil and white wax, and let it be more between severity and gentleness, and strengthen the dressing over that which is strict and painful until the ulcer has subsided; and the hour remains with the dressing and pauses the plaster prepared from powdered millet with lime, and let it rest; and let the support be placed over that fracture more firm and strong.</end_of_turn
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of supports for the limb is seen in the greatest availability, or that the fracture is in a basin or in two basins together.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then pause the bandage firmly over the fracture site until more flexible and when more downwards from the fracture or from the lower parts, pause the bandage a little more moist according to the recollection of its beginning.</end_of_turn
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be moist cloths, neither too soft nor too rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.</end_of_turn
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the ligament for several days.</end_of_turn
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs which requires rectification, as soon as possible as the cause which occurred to the limb, and the hour covers that you immerse the limb in cold water until the cause has ceased.</end_of_turn
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And keep the limb from straining until it has recovered, and then remove the bandage.</end_of_turn
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the swelling is already softened and the bone is already healed and appears as before, the hour will rectify everything with his skill.</end_of_turn
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, for the hour covers that you soften that a little and leave it for several days until it runs out of that nourishment, and strengthen that.</end_of_turn
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if no other cause of those mentioned above occurs in the patient, the hour does not cover that it should be discharged within approximately twenty days or so.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the patient suspend their hand for the movement of their ailment, and make them sleep on the side two.</end_of_turn
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you know that this fracture is usually restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or that the convalescence is usually completed in xxviii days, according to the condition of the complications and the ability of the skill.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and the fingers.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that in the thumb and the fingers there is a fracture, and it does not happen to them except for soft swellings.</end_of_turn
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or tearing to the thumb, the hour covers that the patient should continue to lie down and keep their limb still according to equality, and let the hand rest over that which is extended.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the attendants extend the broken bones and the doctor grasps them until they are congruent with good union.</end_of_turn
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And the hour covers that you stop the plaster and the bandage, if there is no ulcer; and let the support be placed over the area according to the quantity of the limb, and you have already covered that with a bandage.</end_of_turn
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May be if the fracture is in the thumb, you must hold the belly of the palm, and when you do so, hope that the patient will stretch that which is fractured; then strengthen it with a long strap.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the limb is elevated on the palm of the hand, then let the limb be applied to the palm; and stretch it as much as covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	May be if the fracture is at the outer part, then pause one limb at the outer part of the palm and the other limb at the inner part of the palm, so that the hand is opened and closed; and then loosen the tension, as if you were rotating the hand between the thumbs and little fingers
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it happens that the fracture is on one of the knuckles of the fingers, then it is called pus; let it be supported as much as covers and strengthen it with the palm of the hand, and if you wish, place a bandage around the little finger to elevate the fracture and prevent bruising.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May be if the fracture is on the index finger, middle finger, ring finger, or little finger, then let it be supported and bound with the finger to which it pertains; or bind them all together continuously, which is better; or place a bandage over that little finger, as we said in the case of pus
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider and take into account, in your restoration, and oppose — with your skillful operation — whatever may cause these, as it is repeated in the narration of the case.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.</start_of_turn
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, when fractured, moves and is declared to be complete according to the sensation as it is converted to the proximal part and to the sovereign pus.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done in this way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient is placed prone on the belly and on the face.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister extends all the ligament to its quality according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.</start_of_turn
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	May be if it is close to the thigh, then let the ligament be close to the nail at the base of the thumb, so that the extension is on the outside, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture is close to the nail, then let the ligament be close to the nail, and the extension be to the outside.</start_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the physician should bite the bone on both sides more than he reduces it according to the natural conformation; the bone is joined together by a good connection; the hours cover that the plaster and tension are paused, if it does not happen to the limb after the restoration.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	May be if it happens in the restoration, the hours lay aside that for a few days until the cautering plaster has softened, and then return to your care.</start_of_turn
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The tension of the limb is also sufficient: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and bend it two or three times, and remove its excess; and then cover the wound until it reaches the hip and the base of the thigh.</start_of_turn
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And inside long faithfully between the thigh and the wound near the nail of the outside, and the veins of the ligament of the pus-sovereign parts, and the minister revolves around the wound and the thigh as much as the excess of the bandage.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then pause over the thigh in the place of that fracture, and pause two nails on the bone of the limb.</start_of_turn
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And finally fill the voids between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the tension is coagulated.</start_of_turn
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And finally start to bind firmly from the middle over the place of the fracture with three wraps or four, and when you have arrived at the ligament of the place of the fracture, your bind is less and lighter and softer.</start_of_turn
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend two ends of the bandage to the outside until it reaches the ankle, and strengthen both ends of the nails of the other side so that the ligament is not stretched from the hip.</start_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And finally leave the tension on that, so that it does not happen to the limb crookedness or cautering or swelling and remains as it should; and if anything of those should happen, then immediately take it out and rectify what has happened in every way, as we have said many times.</start_of_turn
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if the bone is painful to the touch, then you must embrace that part as much as is possible; otherwise, leave it and remain with that, and care for that from which the memory precedes until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And every other wound is severe with this fracture of the limb, just as we have said in the preface concerning the arms.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring such limb in this way, do not damage the patient’s circulation; and if it is restored alone, another must be applied to the other limb, for it is necessary that the latter remain immobile.</end_of_turn
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the limb is severely bruised in forty days or a few months or a few weeks, according to the diversity of the conditions and the other instruments.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xv.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Treatment for the fracture of the ankle bone.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the ankle bone is not serious, but rather caused by excessive bruising.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if there is a fracture, it is only a fissure or break in their parts, and that is from a wound or swelling, and over that all is done with calmness.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is that it should be embraced as much as possible that which is fractured in the parts, until it is reunited and joined as much as is possible for equality and facility and fabrication.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And put on a plaster and support over that round heel, if you perceive from that; and strengthen it as much as is convenient.</end_of_turn
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the precautions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as the application of cautery and similar things that are opposed to all accidents that may occur until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvi.	End of document.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Treatment for the fracture of the forearm.</end_of_turn
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the forearm there are two bones, of which one is thick, and is called the radius; and the other is slender, and is called the ulna.</end_of_turn
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And there are various kinds of fractures of these bones, just as there are in the arms, and for that reason the restoration of them is as much as the restoration of the arm itself, and the operation is one.</end_of_turn
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are fractured together, the forearm is converted into all parts.</end_of_turn
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the slender bone is fractured, the forearm is converted to the parts surrounding it.</end_of_turn
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if only the thick bone is fractured, the other limb must be left, and this is from those causes that you are not aware of.</end_of_turn
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And provide extension, equalization and ligation of the bones according to that healing.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the forearm is slight without having great swelling, that the extension should be more gentle and less laborious, and rely on your virtue.</end>
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the forearm there is any reason for an operation on the arm, and that is when you embrace the limb and when you have completed all the work of the operation, then you will take away the cause of the pain; align those that are requested to be aligned, and do not be afraid of the hands, and make them as long as the forearm and as much as the elbow allows.</end>
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And put on a bandage over any wound in two layers according to the length of it, and support one over the part of the forearm from one side and the other from the other side, and from the elbow to the wrist.</end><end_turn>
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And secure the two bones in three places at two extremities and in the middle part, so that the structure of the forearm is prohibited from bending to the right and left, and remains in a good position.</end><end_turn><end_turn>
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a plaster sleeve has been administered according to the length of the forearm; and keep it fixed in it so that it conserves that movement.</end><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And more than that, cover what is fractured so that when it is properly healed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in every day the forearm and study it in that way, and you will guard it from apostema and from inflammation or from other causes that may be similar; and when any of these causes occur, then you must take it away from it until it is healed.</end><end_turn>
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Chapter XVII. Of fractures of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.</end_of_turn>
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not often suffer fracture; but in the foot bones some fractures are frequent; and in the toes little fracture occurs, and it does not occur in them except in cases of violent injury.</end_of_turn
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is fracture in the bones of the foot, and sometimes these bones must be elevated among themselves, then prepare the earth under the foot and put the foot down gently as you go.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then put a hand over that which is elevated of those bones, and put on shoes, and hold firmly, and keep them together until they return to their place.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And put on a bandage and hold still, and keep the foot covered with a small table on which are two cushions.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And keep the foot stretched out as much as you can, because you have wrapped up the area with cloth and other things which you must not neglect.</end_of_turn
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will loosen the ligaments, because you will find that the bones are healed, or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in these cases is as dangerous as it is useful.</end>
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of the toes are fractured, then restore them, and bandage them as before. Recommend that you rest the hand.</end>
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And keep the fractured toe still according to the length of the toe, and do not put on shoes for a while. Keep the foot on the table that has been recommended to you, and keep the foot stretched out.</end
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if two or three or more bones are fractured, then keep your hand still over each toe as much as its covering in linen allows, and keep the foot firmly on the table, resting on one of the feet of the table under the foot so that it has good support.</end
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you to know that we have not mentioned all the causes of these fractures; and avoid any other accident which may occur to you.</end>
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn>
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fractures of the knee of the femur and the patella bone and the groove of the heel.</end_of_turn
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee of the femur is fractured, then cease in this case the fall which has caused it, and incline that towards the two a little, and keep it from behind.</end_of_turn
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And put on the cushion and fill the knee with cotton, and make a point on the knee of it as expected; and elevate the two small bones little by little, so that everything that is outside is forgotten until the part of the knee which has been fractured returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And keep powdered over the two of them, and when you finish urinating loosen the cushion somewhat so that the knee is facilitated and put on shoes, and reduce and return that as soon as possible according to the manner in which it was at the beginning, and keep the powdered foot again.</end_of_turn
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do the same for seven days or more, until it is restored.</end_of_turn
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	Or if you wish, take once a sponge and stretch over the knee a tube of silk; and put the whole sponge into the knee, and then put on a bandage over the tube as before until the sponge is swollen inside the knee, which will make the fracture return.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the cushion on the knee and rest it for two or three days as we have recommended, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the patella bone of the knee or the femur bone is fractured, then administer in the restoration and recovery of them as we have recommended in the ankle bone.</start_of_turn
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is hidden in these principal fractures does not appear, more especially to him who studies and uses this book well; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest possibilities of recovery in the restoration and in the stiffness of them, and therefore understand well.</start_of_turn
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But if the heel bone is fractured, take hold of the ankle with one hand and the heel with the other hand; and put the heel on that. And keep the bandage over it tightly, and keep it bound for three days or more, and it will be healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Convenient is he to whom the fracture has happened with swelling, and more so if the bone is great as, for example, the thigh bone or the fibula, or in a similar way, that you may keep him still and prevent him from moving so much as if the conditions of inflammation allow or as much as they have been said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling subsides, then cover that you may retain them inside without causing them to become powdered, if for another reason this is not present
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if not after the swelling has subsided
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Maybe if swelling subsides later, leave the restoration of the fracture until the swelling has gone down, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, for you will cause other accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Maybe if the broken bone is prominent on the edge of the wound, cover that you must perforate to reduce that and equalize that with the rest as easily and with little extension
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Maybe if the extension is not as you have prepared and the equalization is not with the thighs, then reduce that with your hands as much as this discomfort; and this discomfort is useful, for its length is seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of swelling; and for this reason the doctor must take precautions for these three or four according to the quantity that you indicate for the care of the fracture in general
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be round, and be in little thickness so that it is not bent backwards from the pressure during the operation
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be at the acute end to which is margin at the ankles; and be that of it from the greatest to the least extent, and from the middle to the margins
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the way to do it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is a little pale
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that it must be suspended the acute limb elevated over the limb of the prominent bone
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And put it in a groove until the bone returns, and be equalized with any equalization
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the fractured limb is flexible, and you do not take that discomfort for good acceptance, then cover that you insert the limb of that bone until the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Maybe if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cover that with what covers the surgeons whom we have mentioned; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And cover that which remains in the bone of asperility and of small scales.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and when the patient finds acute pain when the fracture is reduced, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you can to comfort the patient greatly
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is finished which you do to the bone, then immerse the limb in black styptic, and properly if it is in summer, and do not put oil over the swelling or any other cause in which there is oil, for this will cause it to soften and decay
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately after administering them give stars in the hour of the meal complementary to the restoration of the bone, and leave the swelling uncovered outside that you insert the needle with forceps and use of bandages according to the quantity of the swelling
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful that you do not tear the swelling with the fracture, because many doctors have seen that this causes them to go blind or to become paralyzed, or to cause them to go mad, so it is good that it is healed well.</start_of_turn>
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the limb is flexible, soft, unlike the stricture of other fractures
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is great or is bad swelling, and you fear about that accident which we have recommended, and if there is pain in the area, then do not put on that plaster, but make a bandage of coarse cloth in the place of needles and tighten it up well.</start_of_turn>
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a couple of days have passed, since the swelling has begun to subside, put on a brace, then remove the bandage which you had put over that with wine, and immediately administer calamine, in the way that we usually do for swelling, as well as tetracycline and following the same procedure.</start_of_turn
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Prepare the limb and consider the swelling in every morning and evening until it is consolidated and stopped, and make sure that the limb is prepared in such a way that the purulence will flow from it to the lower parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the swelling persists for several days and is neither consolidated nor drained, then it is known that there is stagnation of the small humors, causing the swelling to extend further.</end_of_turn>
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those stagnations those which are separated remain and are extracted, those which are not separated remain and cause the limb to swell and cause pain, perforate me to incide these according to what is possible.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the swelling becomes black or green, it is stasis, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to suspend treatment until the cause has been explained in the preceding chapter.</end_of_turn
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in which case you must be silent and your face present your foot: when it is swollen like a walnut, inspect the limb as well as the cushion and the attendant, and remain like those of the great limbs, and do not presume its attraction, nor its extraction which may cause death; leave it alone until it softens, for it will fall down by itself within about twenty days or thirty days.</end_of_turn And the treatment will cure the swelling if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xx.	Chapter twenty.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of swelling that occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These swellings often occur after the healing of a fracture, and are especially common around the joints. They impede the natural function of the limb.</end_of_turn
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Consider whether the swelling is recent and administer such medicines as have been shown to be effective against this when pure, or aloes, or acacia, and observe, and see if there is any redness or heat, and remain like those who have taken some or all of these, and when you have given them, cover the swelling with something soft and compress it firmly.</end_of_turn
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the extraction until more days have passed; and when you have extracted it, repeat it until the swelling has gone down; or stretch over that lamina of lead downwards, for lead has the property of healing all that is swollen in the limbs.</end_of_turn
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Even if the swelling has already become hardened and hardened, and stretching is necessary, it is necessary to perform the incision cautiously, and remove the superabundance, or cut off the excess, until the hardness has gone down; and care for the wound until it has healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter twenty-one.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it has healed and how to restore the limb to its natural function afterwards.</end>
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has healed, and the limb is still stiff and painful, several causes are possible: the stiffness of the ligaments has not been completely overcome; or there is excessive tightening of the ligaments, preventing nutrition from reaching the limb; or there is excessive swelling; or movement is not performed at the right time; or there is insufficient healing in the body and weakness in the limb.</end_of_turn
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to give the patient food and make them drink, to massage the limb to make them tender, and to give them baths; and to remove any discomfort or pain.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And keep the limb still for a while, so that the nourishment can reach it, or continue to bandage the limb with cold water, until the nourishment returns to its normal position.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter twenty-two.</end_of_turn
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of fractured bones when they have been restored and the prevention of their operation by any means that cover them.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a fractured limb has already healed somewhat, and there is still some twisting and prominence of the fractured bone and swelling, do not prohibit the limb from its natural movement, for otherwise you may cause greater damage to the limb.</end_of_turn
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, many foolish doctors and healers have done great harm in this matter; and this operation is extremely dangerous and often fatal.</end_of_turn
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the swelling and bruising are recent, cover them with cold water in which there are many emollient herbs, such as chamomile and gentian, meadowsweet, and the like; or apply soft plaster with gentle traction as well as possible; or take fragments of gentian with oil of cedar or olive oil, and mix them; or take figs and grind them with the colander of a woman, and mix them with the medicines that are not harmful after consolidation.</end_of_turn
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Every day, when the body is rubbed with a lukewarm oil, and movement is administered to all parts at all hours, the swelling will gradually disappear.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Even if stiffness has already departed and a strong pain remains, it is necessary to take care of it with iron, because that which is excessive from nodule of that medicine to the bones becomes subtile, and it is facilitated in that way which is requested and studied.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIIIII.</end_of_turn>
De sermo en dislocacio.	About the disease of dislocation.</end_of_turn>
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint of the limb, which is prohibited from movement, and is accompanied by the figure of the limb, and causes pain and great damage.</end_of_turn
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident of dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perforate as soon as possible so that it is reduced, and do not delay its reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb is swollen and strong, which makes it difficult to reduce the dislocation.</end_of_turn
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to help, do not grasp or stretch during the reduction, because the muscles become rigid and cause spasms and pain.</end_of_turn
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, cover the patient's face with a cloth, and immediately place it within so that rest is restored; and embrace the limb with warm water and oil, and reduce it with ease.</end_of_turn
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all the limb must be treated with the water from which the memory will remain in its limb.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to their order, from the most serious part of the body inwards towards the less serious.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIIIV.</end_of_turn
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	About the treatment of dislocation of the jawbone.</end_of_turn
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So displaced are both mandibles if they are not promptly treated; and the dislocation of both is considered to be beneficial in two ways: that either they are loosely fixed in their places for little movement, or they are simply softened. Or they are completely dislocated and complicated, until they are softened at the junction of the joint, and saliva from the patient's mouth flows between them and they cannot open their mouth or close it, and their tongue is wrapped in their word.</end>
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it is enough to return to its place by itself without any cause.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and complicated, it is necessary to administer its reduction urgently, and do not delay it at all.</end_of_turn
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor puts his finger of the thumb of one hand on the root of the dislocation of the jaw that is towards the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he puts two fingers together on the two roots, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the others say of the rest of them that they are outside those that bite; and commands the patient to stop his jaws and release those that bite; and the doctor bites the jaw and closes the jaw until it returns to its place.</end_of_turn
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are simultaneously displaced, it is necessary to administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is achieved and the reduction of both is not delayed, even if we have said it.</end_of_turn
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are softened, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, the doctor pauses over those little hairs in the beard at the corners, and it is beneficial to apply wax and oil to the gums. And embrace with ease.</end_of_turn
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's sleep on the two sides, the head is placed between two cushions, so that neither side is hurt; and do not force him to bite for any reason; have the limb well nourished, except when the pains have subsided and the jaws are relaxed, the hour may order that he drink.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And it is administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the patient's mouth during eating and drinking and talking, until the jaw is healed and restored.</end_of_turn
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are displaced at any hour and are not converted into their normal positions, the hour must immediately administer fever and continuous soda, and is highly recommended to irritate the patient's stomach, and to vomit pure bile.</end_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And whenever this happens, it is known that it is a dangerous thing; for many have perished from that which has befallen them within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Concerning the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not displaced from the inside towards the outside by its continuity to the feet; and sometimes it is displaced towards the outside, and this is recognized by the feeling
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient grasps over the two buttocks and extends the two buttocks.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And immediately support the area with your palm with strong pressure, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And immediately place your hand over that plaster and powder and tighten that
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which has suffered the colicky pain and has continued with that, not be displaced in any day; for it must be reduced and maintained as we have said and as you have observed
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And immediately place your hand over that plaster, powder, and tightening, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this way the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from the bony area
Capitol .xxvi.	End of document
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Concerning the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not displaced except in three ways, of which one is that it is displaced from the upper part towards the lower part
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is that it is displaced from below the muscle, and that is good; it is not displaced from behind by the scapula; and it is not displaced from in front by the nerves
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Most frequently it is displaced outwards from the lower part towards the titillic, and especially in those in whom the flesh is little, inasmuch as it is easily displaced; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it is difficult to displace it outwards
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And frequently it happens to some people because of percussion or falling, and the muscle of them is loosened by the cautery, and is healed in that way that it has already been displaced
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore you must know when you are finished with it, and then proceed with the treatment of it
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of the muscle is when it is towards the lower part towards the titillic; so that you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the sound muscle, for you will find among these various manifestations; and you will find on the head of the muscle a concavity and towards the titillic behind the touch of the head of the muscle as if there were a hole, and the patient is not able to reduce his hand to the navel, or to move it in any way
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is displaced from below or from above, and you find the touch manifested, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation is useful the gentle reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of the patient above the lower part; and immediately place the thumbs behind the titillic of the patient, and raise the joint with strength at the level of the navel, and the minister raises the hand and extends that one; and immediately place that one back so that it returns gently
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May it be that although we have said that it does not return, nevertheless from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, for several days, the patient must be bathed in lukewarm water and be administered embrocation that softens and soothes just like if it were ointment, and fennel, and melilot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And immediately the patient must be placed on his side and be held down from the titillic of the patient until the swelling has gone down between the levitation and the tension, and the physician immediately places the thigh against the hip, and raises the head of the muscle with force, and the minister holds the hand of the patient so that it is not bruised towards the lower parts, and another minister has the head of the patient, that it is not bruised towards the lower parts, for that much pain returns to the navel
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Or if you wish, you can reduce it in this way: make sure that you have another person who is longer than the patient present on that side, and that he is between the thigh and the muscle of the patient, and insert the thigh of the patient behind the titillic of the patient and elevate the titillic to the lower part until the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower parts of the abdomen
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is obstinate, know that other causes must be suspended, so that the greatest may remain, for the dislocation will return immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	It is reduced immediately in another way: let a long staff remain fixed on the ground, rounded at one end like a mortar pestle, which should not be thick or thin, and place the patient upon it; for when you place your hand over the head of the staff, the patient is stable according to the length of the staff, and extend your hand to the sides of the other part; extend the limb of the patient from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its proper place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have said, then use this remedy: take a staff the length of two brasses, and the width of four fingers, and the thickness of it should be relieved in the crease of the buttocks in this manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place over the rounded head some leather straps to prevent the staff from injuring the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place your hand or arm over the buttocks of the patient, and extend your hand or arms over the staff up to the sides, and tie the staff to the adjutors and the arms and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place your arms on a step according to the width, and extend your hand to the sides, and the other limb should be suspended from the other side, so that the joint is inside immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the limb is inside according to some manner that you deem possible, and when you have paused behind the buttocks for an amount equal to the quantity of wool; then pause with prepared plaster of powder of malt and alum of lead over all the muscles, so that it is rotated away from the bone, and strengthen behind the buttocks with tight tension; and the ligament should be rotated over the plaster, and the hand should be fixed to the limb, and be allowed to rest, and do not move the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And know that the patient should be fed little, until the limb is comfortable, for it is more likely to heal the limb.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And give the food more frequently every seven or eight days, or let them do some movement; and thus if it is stopped and not softened, the hour has already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	However if the joint is dislocated slightly from moisture that happens to it, or from another cause, know that it must be cauterized with three prongs, as it is said in the chapter of cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and seven days have passed, the ligament is detached and the joint is not stopped, and the plaster and the tension are reduced over it several times, and it is not stopped and catches and cannot elevate that limb to the sides, know that the nerves of the limb, which are at the head of the muscle, are already insensible or extended or softened, and that the joint will never be fixed in place again
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is useful, take the foot and the ankle or the buttocks, the reduction is useful with impulse and extension more than by return
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in the other way, and take care of that until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if by chance the recovery falls behind in the limb and the movement of it is delayed, the patient must use hot packs until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its natural state
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of care for dislocation of the knee joint.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the knee joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated throughout is more especially from the front to the back, and the dislocation of the knee is not hidden from you because it is caused by leaving it too long or by touching it according to whatever figure is dislocated, and when the knee joint is adjusted the dislocation is seen immediately, that is to say that the knee is concave and cannot bend the limb, nor touch with any of the muscles
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And know that the knee and the ankle must be reduced as quickly as possible after the cautery is applied, for if you see it after the cautery is applied, the reduction will be difficult and will not be successful in any way; and more so when it is at the back, for it is worse in all other kinds of dislocation, and more painful, and many veins must be ligated in that area for death
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that which is possible is reduced, is that the hand be extended with two hands, the arms be expanded, and the hands of the physician be placed over the knee and under it, and the plaster must embrace the joint with the nails of the nails together, or with the heel of the palm within that it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	May be if the dislocation is at the front, then return it by bending the hand toward the hand, until you perforate the cavity with the edge of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer violent extension and a strong thrust.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants extend the arms, and hold the patient's eyes so that it does not slip during the extension
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And immediately rotate the arms around all parts, because it is enveloped around the hand or ligament
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, unite some oil so that it is moistened by those things that help to lubricate the joint and facilitate; and then press the joint with force until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then cover the reduction with a bandage that has styptic and exudative properties of the album of hue, and suspend the limb with a tight bandage, and keep it suspended for several days
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then untie; and therefore if the joint is formed in the heel bone, then you should dissect the ligament of the heel and leave it free.</start_turn>
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint is not healed, then repeat the packing and the ligament, and leave it for several days until it is extruded; and then untie it.</start_turn
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	May be if the accident has happened to it gravitated toward the reduction of the joint, and the condition is in movement, then administer humidity in vapor and friction in the air, and comprehend, until it is relieved; or rest over the joint relieved of greasy matter; and tie it up, and leave it for the day and the night.</start_turn
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And do so again, and put it in water; and when it is evening, the doctor should gently massage the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat over that relieved of nausea, so that it is harmonious of movement, one third, and two thirds, and the third.</start_turn
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread throughout the bowels within the belly, until it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, rest over that wound of the wet cow and scald it around the border and stretch over that; and make a few compressions, so that it is wet and reduces to its condition.</start_turn><end_turn>
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</start_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the limb, that is between the arm and the hand.</start_turn
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The limb of the hand many times is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is light, while the opposite is of the other joints, however cover that the speed in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated is not that the heel be apostematized or that something happens to it apostematized with the caut.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you rest the wrist of the patient over a table and the minister extends the hand of that, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the imminent of the joint, and press that until it returns to the heel bone.</start_turn><end_turn>
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However it must be considered if the palm is already twisted inside the hand, the doctor must place two hands of the patient over a table beyond the extension and the reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, you must place two hands of the patient, the doctor must place his hand intrinsically over the table so that his hand covers that imminent of the joint.</start_turn><end_turn
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns well, it is good; and if not, the doctor should tighten that with a bandage yielding the apostema and leave that; and do not repeat that, because if not, it will suffer or cannot be done over the reduction of it until they pass over it days.</start_turn><end_turn
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However the joint remains according to its stiffness; and do not notice to the patient any cause, but that the hand is softened and cannot tighten any cause; the doctor should know that the nerves are cut or crushed, and that it is not due to it but that it is tightened with a pointed cautery as much as possible in the case of it and strong as much as it confers any cause.</start_turn><end_turn
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the limb is returned, the doctor should rest over it the bandage that has been recommended, and leave it and tighten it for five days; and then untie it and leave it and exercise the hand.</start_turn><end_turn
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However if the movement of it is last and the accident has happened to it in any gravity, the doctor should lengthen that with cold water and with some compressions until it is relieved.</start_turn><end_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.</start_turn
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	From the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some veins are dislocated from their entirety throughout the limb
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger of those at the base or at the palm is dislocated, then it is said to be stiff and the dislocation must be driven back by placing the thumb and little finger against it, until it returns
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the head of the finger, and suspend that part from which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And suspend it and extend it until it is equal in that limb on the next day
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it in the day and exercise it, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is healed
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same in this way if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and bind it to that part and do the first operation again, until it is healed
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	End of document
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	From the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident happens to any vertebra of the spine or the pelvis dislocates completely, and some vertebrae are displaced from their places, in such a case there is no cure, for death is hidden under the sickness
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the evacuation of the sickness is beyond voluntary control, and cannot be retained; and some veins are softened in some part of the limb or two veins of the limb or two bones of the limb, or one of these; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, which is softened and that the evacuation is made to four parts
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that has already been softened behind and is called gelliosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the treatment of it be that you consider if the gelliosis happened in infancy, for in that case neither the cure nor the healing of everything is possible
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May in that case where it appears by chance or by percussion or by sensation that the ancients spoke of long methods of treatment, of which the most useful returns with profit; but I have already mentioned that I will abbreviate from that which is little useful for the great number, because of my proximity to the understanding of my exposition, which is what I have exposed and learned from various instruments, which I will show you and explain that one.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in gelliosis that happens from the front of the foot, neither cure nor healing of that exists; and in the same way in that which it is caused by two blows.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those there is no cure except that which happens in the two parts themselves with that which I recommend
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the sickness be spread over its face over the edge of the gut and be extended without stretching them so that it does not touch the bones of the limb.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And put a vessel that has been torn to stop at the root of the gut surrounding the head of the limb, and another vessel in the belly of the limb in the other extremity of the limb.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister has the vessel, and it is not fixed in the fossa; and another minister has the other in that way
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And put a bandage over the head of the sickness and leave the nails to be seen; and extend the limb to the vessel which is at the head of the limb, and bind that to it; and put the other ligament over the buttocks of the limb under the navel, and over the bones of the limb; and adjust all the ligaments and bind them to the other vessel which is at the feet of the limb
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister grasps outside and extends the ligament to the part of the vessel, and they are not displaced from the two vessels and the ligaments of the limbs in which they are fixed, but nevertheless they are not fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician puts his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or that he puts them on a table, and that he adjusts on the table the limbs of the patient until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, the physician takes a board of which the width or length is equal to three bones, and which is hollow in the belly, and he makes a hole in the wall of which we have said that it is proper for the sickness to be a place in which to put the limb.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And the physician places the heel of the board on the vertebra, and the physician places the limbs of the patient on the other side, and he pulls until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish, open the turn which is rotated among the hands; and that you remain on the ground keep the head of the patient at the back of the thighs, the length of one arm, and keep the head of them at the back of the knee with two fingers; and let the length be from one fist to the other fist, and already it is done in every fist where the turn comes back, and every one that remains on the ground shall not be moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let one fist be round in which the turn is, and let it be rotated in the two joints of the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of them is a joint in which the fist is formed, the length of which is a palm as much as that which is rotated; and in the two other fists it is similar to this one
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then strengthen the ligaments that you have strained in the feet of the patient at the joint which is behind their head, and the ligaments which you have strained in the thighs of them at the turn which is behind their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you must do every turn and stay there with a minister who will support the turn with his hand, and the physician will stabilize the spine as we have said
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the way of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has returned and the limb has been stabilized, the hour covers that you keep pressing with your hand towards the heel, and stop; and then place your hand over the bandage which is under the table which is as wide as three fingers or more, and as long as it covers the area of the swelling, and over the part of the spine that is below
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And as for the ligament which we have mentioned, use the patient’s natural nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any swelling in the limb at the end of the healing, the hour covers that medicines that soften and soothe are administered with the application of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and they are already administered in that limb lamina of lead
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And many times the swelling immediately disappears behind the spines of both, and it is cured for that dislocation; and that is the bone which has already been mentioned because it does not seem to be necessary for this medicine, for its strength will do you more harm than good.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXV
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the care of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle must not be dislocated only, but that it must not happen to the other joints of the foot that are remote from the concavity and the prominence.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, which is dislocated at the front, or at the back, or at the top, or at the bottom
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated at the front, and little at the top or at the bottom
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And a sign of the dislocation at the front is that, when you adjust the limb of the patient who is healthy with the limb that is sick, the ankle is longer and the heel is more prominent than the healthy one, and the limb cannot bend the knee over the ankle, and the limb is limp even after the cautery has been performed, so that the head of the bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation at the back is that the accident happens in the opposite way to this one
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation at the top is that the limb expands slightly as you command, but nevertheless does not bend where it hurts, and if you force it to go down it cannot go over that which is painful; and the urine is retained and the swelling is stagnant, and you must ambulate the limb on the ankle
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation at the bottom is that it does not expand the ankle, nor does it allow bending of that which bends the swelling, and the limb is shorter than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the bone is over that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	More reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, the hour, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already outdated with you having brought it to this state, the hour is not in this treatment at all; and when it is not necessary that in this case there is any benefit from this medicine
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	More in that one in which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, the hour will order you to return the joint and extend it to the front and to the back, and also to the right and left, for the force will return and will not need any other treatment
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May, if he does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the limb from the part beyond where you have left it, or from the chest or from the limb that is bound to it; and another minister extend the hand of that which is nearest to the head and put his thumb on the nails of the limb. Then strengthen the limb with a tight bandage over the area and have another minister hold the extremity of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend the limb or from the part towards the ankle to the part of the heel or from the part behind to the part of the buttocks.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And extend all of them together until the patient is elevated on the seat of the earth and remains hanging down
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this method of extension is customary for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And thus if the dislocation returns where we have said, it is well; and if not, it is necessary to take all the measures that we have said of proper care
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the limb itself, when it is dislocated, if the dislocation is at the heel, cover that the patient should be placed sitting on the buttocks; and then suspend the ligaments over the area of the joint at that place where between the head of the joint and the place that is left to hang down; and then extend the limb from the ankle to the highest part of the heel
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister should firmly grasp the ankles and immediately immobilize the great toe of the painful joint and extend the limb from the other side for violent extension, so that that which returns to the seat of the joint
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This method is less severe treatment than the others for which this limb is reduced.<end_turn>
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused about you and you do not obey the order according to this method of treatment, it is necessary that both feet of the patient be bound together with a strong ligament, loosely, over both ankles and over both toes.<end_turn>
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each part be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and let the painful limb be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the patient be suspended over the head of the foot, and that he should be in the major; and let the length of the limb from the earth be equal to the quantity of two ankles
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And let a strong youth command that he flex the head of the joint, and that another youth should suspend himself with the patient, and the other youth should push down the limb with force, so that the joint returns to the seat of the joint quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated at the outer part, cover that the patient should grab about the heel as we have recommended in the cold; and tighten the ligament over the painful limb properly and over the toes of the limb.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two thighs should be placed, one at the foot of the limb, and the other at the head; and two thighs adjusted to the middle of the thigh that is left resting on which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not moistened because the thigh is between the patient's thighs, because of that the extension of the limb from the ankle should not be too violent.<end_turn>
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each minister extend his part, and the doctor with his hand grasp the reduction according to the art.<end_turn
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey respectfully, it will be very good; and if not, suspend until you have diligently completed what we have said in cold for that engagement.<end_turn>
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And cover that the patient grasps about the buttocks slightly.<end_turn
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the ankle, it is necessary that the limb be slightly extended; and this is according to the aforementioned method for the thigh; and the doctor should place the palm of his right hand over the painful limb, and let him take hold of that with his left hand, and with that hold the limb extended from the ankle to the heel.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary that the limb be extended from the ankle, but that it be elevated above the earth; and it is necessary that it be held firmly in place, just as if the ankle joint was dislocated outwards, as we have said of the position of the limb over two palms; and it is on its face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, not too tightly.<end_turn>
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary that a bandage be administered around the area around the joint which is painful.<end_turn
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore when the reduction is completed as we have said – and the sign of the reduction of the limb is not hidden from you, that you extend two limbs of the patient, and when you have once again pulled those bandages and the patient pulls his seat limb and expands that excuse, you will know that the limb as we have said is returned – and then you adjust two cushions and place them under and extend with a bandage so that the ankle is not bruised in any of the parts; and keep the patient still for three days or for four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And remove the ligament and the paste, and compare one limb with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When, however, these inflammations remain in the limb, it is known that the dislocation has already ceased, and now you must let the patient rest.</end_of_turn>
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if any cause of discomfort remains, then you return it and cover that [affected area], and remove that according to your first structure, and leave that for three days.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And remove that [affected area], and make that walk slowly on crutches for several days, until comfort is restored.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxii.	(The text continues with further medical instructions)</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatment for dislocation of the thumb.</end_of_turn>
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways, that is, dislocation at the base, at the middle, and at the distal joint; and not at the proximal joint.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that the patient applies pressure to the limb; know that the thumb is dislocated.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these positions is to make the patient flex the limb, extend the limb as much as possible; attach two fingers to the side of the limb, and suspend the foot of the limb between the thighs; and make sure to reattach the thumb to its place between the two metacarpal bones with force, and another assistant should extend the limb until the thumb returns to its place.</end_of_turn
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is that the limb rests easily without pain.</end_of_turn
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And cover that with a dressing and make the limb adhere to the limb, and bind the two together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove the bandage.</end_of_turn
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not let the patient walk for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.</end_of_turn
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Moreover, if the reduction was performed by you, know that you must administer a strong extension of the ligaments that were previously treated for the swelling.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of treatment for dislocation of the thumb.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Treatment for dislocation of the ankle.</end_
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle may be slightly sprained due to minor dislocation, or it may be completely dislocated, and the dislocation can be located at the proximal or distal joint.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells as a result of the dislocation.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for reduction is gentle recovery, that is, with ease and without pain, and is extended with the greatest ease when possible, and is reduced when it returns.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the dislocation is complete, make the patient flex the limb and keep that finger held in place by a strong and valiant assistant at the back of the limb in place of the dislocation.</end_of_turn
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And put your right hand over the great toe and your left hand over the little toe of the foot in the place of the ankle.</end_of_turn
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with the left hand for two inches, and extend with the left; and support the foot of the limb with the right hand beside the bandage.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two inches as many times as necessary.</end_of_turn
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And support the foot of the limb to the bandage for the third inch, and you are at the ankle.</end_of_turn
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one inch or two according to this manner, and if the foot sometimes swells, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation until it returns.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If the reduction is prohibited in this way, make the patient sit on the toes on the ground, and apply a cushion under the foot, and that you keep between the thighs of the patient, and you have already immobilized the limb with a bandage to prevent it from being injured.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the assistants should hold the patient's thighs, and another assistant should extend the limb with their hands or with the ligaments that lie on the ankle; and extend whichever assistant wants against the extension of the limb, and the cushion should remain between the patient's thighs to prevent the limb from being pulled downwards from its extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor grasps the dislocation at the hip joint, while another assistant holds the sound limb away from the affected area, so that the dislocation can return easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, when the dislocation has returned and its soundness has been declared, stop the plastering and gently stretch the limb again, and bind the foot to the limb with a bandage.</end_of_turn>
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware or take care of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligament on that side is not tight and the other side is not too loose.</end_of_turn>
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, remove it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the fourth day or the fifth, remove the dressing and prohibit the patient from eating for forty days.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it be necessary to go down again that space, it is not wrong to ensure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it receives no treatment.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if during the process of treatment the patient develops a fistula, cover that in the cede of our narration in another place of care and dressing, until it has healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocations of the bones of the foot.</end_of_turn
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Therefore, that which has been dislocated must be grasped with little traction; and what is not difficult, abstain from it.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the ankle bone of the two feet, then cover the patient’s foot with the earth or a table, and remain in that way as if you were going.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then rest your feet, and keep the foot above the joints still over what you imagine from the joints, and keep your heel on the same level as before, until it returns, and that you see that it has healed and does not reappear in the immediate area.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And leave the patient’s foot under a board that covers all the foot, which has two caps, and keep that tight with a strap for three days; and then remove that and have the patient walk for a month, until it is healed and the recovery is ensured.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.</end_of_turn
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocations that are caused by swelling or fracture or any other lesion.</end>
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of these has occurred, and you have perforated in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, many times death follows.</end_of_turn
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Therefore, for this we do not presume that in the treatment of that we should trust, but he who is learned in the art, of long experience, merciful and humble, prudent, not arrogant or presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning of medicines that do not cause fistula so much alone, and that you read the patient to the divine judgment, rather than to that to which you hope for healing, from the disease relief, and in which you appear any hope.</end_of_turn
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so do your best to make the reduction in the beginning of the cause, despite the fistula.</end_of_turn
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And so if the limb returns as we want, then administer a regimen that yields fistula and heals the swelling in what way it seems convenient to you.</end_of_turn
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is in a fractured bone and the fragments are separated, then you perforate the membrane of their cavity, and do what has been said in the simple diseases of what precedes these.</end_of_turn
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And keep and avoid according to your prudence that which is before you of the treatment of fear as I have foretold; for what is better for you must be attributed to the Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more profitable for the true things that are in your heart.</end_of_turn
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the treatise of Albucasim perfectly blessed by God.</end_of_turn>
Amen.	Amen.</end_of_turn>
