Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, children, I have now completed this book for you, which is the latest of the science of medicine, to your delight, because of your faith in me, because of your exposure to me, and because of your declarations of me, behold that I must explain to you this treatise which is a part of my art, that is to say, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery is highly dangerous in our land and in our time, so that the science of it is almost lost; and its vision is almost gone; and it remains only with a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change the most and cause those errors and hesitation which arise from the understanding of it and from the shortness of its force and art
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen by me that I have composed this treatise in such a way as to follow the path of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and that I have added to the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the work as much as possible, in order to facilitate the declaration and to prepare the work, which is necessary
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the greatest cause why no wise man can be found in our time who is able to perform this art is that the art of medicine is long, and that it requires a great actor who has been exercised in the science of anatomy, who knows the structure of the members and the form of those, and the junction and separation of them; and who has the knowledge of bones, nerves and veins, and the number of them, and their color; and of the pulse of the veins and the quietness of the body.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And thus says Hippocrates that I have no name, more in the little work, and most of all in the art of the hand
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And indeed we have already said in the beginning of this book that whoever is not learned in anatomy will fall into an error which will cause the death of men, as I have seen many of them who have been formed in this science and have departed from it because of this science and their experiments
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish doctor who, being skilled, has incised an abscess of scrofula in the groin of a woman, and has incsed several arteries of the groin so that there flows a great abundance of blood, and the woman died between her thighs as a result
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who, being proud, took hold of a stone from a man who was suffering from it in his belly, and the stone was great, and he brought it to me and I cut that stone out with a piece of the intestine, and the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already mentioned this, and I see that for the greatness of the stone and for the condition of the patient I knew beforehand that he would die
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who took charge of the surgery of a duke from our land, and because of his stupidity he fractured the pelvis of a black slave who belonged to him; and neglecting to prepare the patient, he cut the fracture without letting out the wound, with sponges and towels of great tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And thus I have seen him depart according to his desires, and I have seen him relax, and I have seen him lie down for several days and command that we remove the bandage; and thus he died when the cavity and the foot were exposed after the abscess had burst, and he perished
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I went to see him, and I found him to be calm and quiet, and he allowed me to remove the bandage, and peace returned and he was relieved of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption had already spread in the limb, for that I was unable to check it, and I was forced to continue the corruption in the limb until the patient was in danger of death
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer, and it ulcerated almost immediately, until the malice of the disease had increased so much in the master of the house that it became unbearable for him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that cancer is pure melancholy humor, for it does not suffice for it to reach its full extent, but that it should remain in the limb which is suffering so that it should be the host of all things
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And thus, children, it is necessary for you that the art of the hand be divided into two parts: that which is associated with health, and that which is dangerous in the greatest precautions
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already spoken of this in all places of this book concerning the operation in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to guard against this and to leave that which may cause fear among the fools, so that they do not find fault with you or despise you
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take up the sacred arms in the request and in the protection of God, and the wicked diseases in their flattery and their gentleness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e in le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e in derier a las evermore sanctitatz.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed, I have already mentioned several times:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“No medicine can cure a bad disease, so that no doctors will be called by name”.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already read this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Let us begin the division of the book, and first of all from the first part
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is arranged concerning the parts of the body, the forms of instruments and cautery utensils, and what is necessary for the operation
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The second part is divided
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with swelling and perforation, windblows, ulcers, and the extraction of arrows, all categorized and arranged according to the forms of the instruments
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, healing of twists and similar cases; the chapter is arranged concerning the parts of the body, and the forms of the instruments
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery to acute medicine and reminder of the operation
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise of the entire book
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	As for what I have said about the quality of the instruments of that cautery and the documents of them, and in what combination it is prohibited to perform cautery
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse concerning the quality of the instruments of the cautery and the documents of them is a long and elaborate one, subtle for science, and a secret that is hidden; and that many great scholars have spoken about it, and they have disagreed with each other, and I believe that I have already said enough on this subject, fearing a lengthening of the discourse.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that the performance of cautery is permitted in all cases, except for two cases, which are the cautery of living beings and the cautery of inanimate matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the cold and dry case, concerning inanimate matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is useful in that case, while others say that it is harmful. For indeed, the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that in a cold and dry ailment the application of fire and dryness should be made.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that those who say the opposite are mistaken, for in all cold and dry ailments that appear in the bodies of men, since you compare the body of man with the humidity of the air to the nature of fire, you find the body of man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say concerning this discourse that I have already experienced several times in practice
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	I do not wish to speak of what has already been expounded and exercised in the chapter of cautery after practice, and to know the diversity of the composition of men and the arrangement of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of these, and their accidents, and the passage of time concerning these things
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other cases, however, it is not about you to fear, and especially in cold and wet ailments, for indeed all doctors agree on this, and they do not disagree concerning the usefulness of cautery in those cases
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know this, my son, that the secret of curing with fire and the goodness of it lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized, and does not affect the other member adjacent to it except for a slight document.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Indeed, the action of external medicine reaches only to that member in which it is applied, and does not cause any great harm in the healthy member next to it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	For fire, by its very nature and its substance, does not cause anything other than what is necessary. And we already know from experience and from long experience of study that fire is useful for the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused for the length of this discourse, for it is not customary for me to speak of such secret things to you.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Indeed, master, it is wise to delay the cautery and pause at the best time of the year.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for thus it is submerged in the joy of that which makes the cautery unbearable, especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer from delay for fear that something malicious should come of it, which is greater than a slight neglect of the time.</end_of_turn>
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	I do not consent in such matters, or, master, those who do not esteem except the vulgar people and mad doctors, for it is not ridiculous at all times. Indeed, concerning that disease which is cured by cautery, it is not ridiculous at all times, and to pause is not at all necessary.</end_of_turn>
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus that they say, for cautery is nothing other than a means of medicine which alters the composition and dries out the humors which are the cause of these pains.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Therefore, however, excessive cautery over medicine is desired for the worth and virtue of its operation and the greatness of the Lord's mercy.</end_of_turn>
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that your disease will return at any hour of the time, according to the composition of the disease and the location of the disease, and the virtue of them, and what is prepared in the body of them from the accumulation of superfluities in them, and what is obtained by them in their acquisition through food and the like of those causes; but if the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a limb of few superfluities and humors, as for example cautery for toothache and the like, it is possible that in them the said pain will not return, even though it is done little.</end_of_turn>
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it may be said vulgarly that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a crafty word, not to which I agree, for I believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine or from any other cause except cautery itself.</end_of_turn
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	On the contrary, the cause is that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is true only when the methods of healing are administered in certain diseases, and those medicines do not suffice, and when the cause is finally overcome, cautery is administered, and it profits from that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And indeed, from here it is sixteen years since I have said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the vulgar people and the fools of doctors have.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	I say that gold is better than silver, and I do not say this except for the equality of the gold and the inferiority of its substance.</end_of_turn
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	I say that the location of cautery does not make it bad, as it is not absolutely true, for I have already seen that it does no harm in any other way, and that cautery is good in that; but indeed when you make cautery with fire of gold, it is not your business, for it is ignited according to the quantity you wish for the brilliance of the gold, and you must prepare to receive cold; and if you do not adjust for it, the gold will be consumed by the fire, and if you do adjust for it too much, some plates will be shattered because the artist will be forced to cut too close to the edge.</end_of_turn
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, for this reason it is better to make cautery with silver than with gold, and we must put it more lightly and more cautiously to the right of the operation.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those which are between the feet to be read, so that I may satisfy the request of those who ask for them.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headaches due to cold and humidity.</end_of_turn
Le capitol primier.	Chapter one.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on cold and humidity the accidental cause of which is the cause of soda and multiple flux traumatic, called corissa, from the head to the limbs and the joints fluent, and multiple sleep, and toothache and gut pain, and universally of all diseases that come from cold, even such as paralysis, suffocation and apoplexy, and it is similar in these diseases.</end_of_turn
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first of all we command the patient to be evacuated with laxatives for three or four nights, according to whether you expect the virtue of the disease and its age and its custom.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then we command him to shave his head with a razor, and then we do that which is between your thighs over a fallen bench and that you place your hands over your feet.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And hold your thumb close to the root of your nose between your eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Moreover, when the physician suspects that the limb is affected, he should mark that area with a cautery, which has this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And hold it above the affected area, without stretching it too much, until the hand is slightly constricted, and then release it gently.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand slightly and support the limb, and if you see any quantity of bone exposed, even as much as the quantity of barley grains, elevate your hand until you see the bone again.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a little salt and dissolve it on the limb and leave it on for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And hold over the wound edge in butter and leave it on until the scar of the fire is destroyed
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And give the limb rest with the tetrafarmacon until it is healed
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And indeed when the wound remains open, one should take off the sleeve, for it is better and more beneficial.</start_of_turn>
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I say that if the bone is cauterized near the bone, and if the cautery is kept on until every part of the substance of the bone is solidified, then the pain will be cured forever.</start_of_turn>
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And let the area around the bone be smooth and let it be healed.</start_of_turn
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	I say that if the cautery is applied behind the bone, before it penetrates the bone, it will cause the bone to swell and become painful, and this is the way of making an incision in a small way.</start_of_turn
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that from that area vapor escapes from the head.</start_of_turn
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound remain open for a long time, and let it be healed when solidified.</start_of_turn
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not know these two kinds of cautery, except in the hands of fools; and leave it to them, for I believe that it is better to be healthy than to be lame, as we have seen in other members, and especially when the patient has a cold temperament.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first kind of cautery is better and more beneficial, for it is safer and more healing; and from that one and from this work I wish health to you.</start_of_turn>
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.</start_of_turn
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.</start_of_turn
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain and the disease has been prolonged, and if there are burns, blisters, carbuncles, plasters, wool, sponges, lead, mercury, or silkworms, and especially if the head is already cauterized with one cautery which does not benefit it from these causes, then consider that if the head of the disease has a strong tendency to grow, it is not frail and you find no great heat, then you should cauterize with another cautery leaving a little space between them.</start_of_turn
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And cauterize the area around the heel of the foot with the cautery until the bone is fractured.</start_of_turn
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and uncover from the bone the quantity that we have recounted, and cauterize that part at the back of the head in the area where the veins are compressed — that is the place where the wind is stopped.</start_of_turn
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand over it, and do not uncover the bone, for the disease from this cause experiences great pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.</start_of_turn
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I say that this cautery is in this place, because the cautery of the head with which the horns and the occipital bone are cauterized is more subtle than that which is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the way to do it.</start_of_turn
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cautery of ancient emigration.</start_of_turn
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is severe pain in the part of the head, or widespread pain throughout the head, evacuate with medicines the head moderately, and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the preceding chapters; and if this does not benefit, then cauterize in two ways: with acute medicine that burns, or with a cautery.</start_of_turn
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Better is to cauterize with acute medicine than to take an amount of alum, to soak it, and to remove the extremities of it from both heads.</start_of_turn
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And immediately prick the area of pain in the temple with a lancelet that goes in until it reaches the bony area, leaving the corden hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And press over it [the painful area] with a stopcock to reduce the tension, and leave it for three hours; then remove the ligature and draw out the blood, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and place your hand over the area until the pain subsides
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And care for that which is affected until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, know that many medicines combat these which I have written about in the treatise on combatting medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be carried out according to this manner: fire for cautery of this kind:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	... and is called a closed claw, which has a head like a claw in which there is a slight curvature, and at the end of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the area of pain, and hold your hand – so that the wound which is left does not stick – and draw out the fire little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood that is adhered to the corden is great, as much as the majority of it, elevate your hand so that the artery which is left does not adhere, so that there is no flow of blood
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And soak the wound in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it for three days; then remove the dressing from the wound and cover the area with a wet dressing, and care for the area until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the edge of the cuticle according to the cautery, and keep yourself away from the incision of the artery in this migration properly not-ancient.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cautery of ancient migration
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you have cured the migration by the means we have mentioned in the previous treatment, and by the divisions of the diseases, and you do not take advantage of the treatment, and sometimes for the disease which does not suffice to it with the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then leave the cautery iron on the nail until it is whitened, because it signifies over the area of pain along the length of which is the majority of the finger, or whatever; and remove your hand for a moment and press that area until you have incised the artery and reached the bone
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However necessary is that you take care of the continuity of the mandible, which is unlucky for biting, and that the nerve which is bad is not adhered and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood of the artery that is cut, which is feared, and above all that which ignores what is done and is negligent; leave the operation to the beginning
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to remind you of the regimen of the flow of blood concerning the cut of the artery according to their manner, in the place of this book
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that this cautery does not suffice and you see that the limb of the patient is tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and care for the wound until it is healed
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with two hooks, and this is a better cautery and more reliable
Capitol .v.	Chapter five
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery of the pains of the heel
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the heel there is pain from cold and it is cured by means of laxatives and by the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not gone, then leave the fire of the cautery, and this is the one which has no point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And immediately prick around the fire, and keep the fire moving around the whole heel as if it were rolling, or in the circle of any vessel if the pain is in any place
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with you the cautery of the root of the heel a little at a time because you have marked the area with the hand.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you have made nine punctures throughout the heel, and what is that? And immediately care for the wounds until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six
De cauterizacio de turtura.	From cautery of the tumor.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tumor which is cured by cautery is nothing other than the specia which comes from inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.</end_of_turn>
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the specia which must be dried or which causes spasm of the nerve.</end_of_turn>
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured that tumor of the tumor, and you have pulled out the hair and cauterized, and you have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then cover the wound with three cauteries: the first you must make at the root of the hair, the second a little further away from the root, and the third at the junction of two lips.</end_of_turn
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And stop the bleeding with the cautery against the side of the wound, because excessive bleeding is only seen in the part that is being cured.</end_of_turn
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way of cautery is that you cauterize that which is causing the bleeding at the root of the hair plus a little above the nail, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and stop your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the matter of the specia of the blood clot has been consumed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the way of the cautery, and it is the specia of the knife, the form of which is like a table.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More especially, because in this way you can see it for yourself; and cover that with more than superfluous fat a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And cover the wound with that which is denanting to go away when it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	From cautery of ancient apoplexy.</end_of_turn
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexy is ancient and you have cured that which we have said and do not confirm your medicine and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that which is with four cauteries: over all the nails of the foot; and as we have said at the root of the hair and in the middle of the head; and at the root of the beard.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is sufficient as we have said.</end_of_turn
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is better later; and do the same with the cure that proceeds.</end_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	From cautery of immediate oblivion caused by inflammation.</end_of_turn
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover that the patient has given to the patient at the beginning with large jars and pills that serve to moderate.</end_of_turn
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And cover the whole head of the patient and stop his teeth by placing his gums on the plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.</end_of_turn
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And stop any herbs, because that is the manner of the cautery.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do the same according to that method or the which I have already said.</end_of_turn
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if for these people it is good; and if not, then do three cauteries at the back of the foot, which depend from the most superior part of the head to the most distant part of the heel.</end_of_turn
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And stop between each cautery the greatness of the finger, and do the cure of the cautery with that which proceeds.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	More if you become addicted and the patient is able to tolerate it, then do the cautery in the middle of the head; and if you wish to make greater addition, then cauterize that over the two nails.</end_of_turn
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Do the cure as soon as it is healed; and let the cautery be olive oil according to the manner which is said to be appropriate.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ix.	End of Document.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	From cautery of nails and from softening of all the body.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you are processing in the moderation of the head with jars and with that which we have said; and cover the head of the patient, and cauterize that which is cauterized in the middle of the head, and over all the nails of the head, and over the back of the neck, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the spine.</end_of_turn
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of the limbs that this and the maladies tolerate and the disease is strong, then cauterize that which is with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the buttocks, and then cauterize until it is consumed by the clot of blood, and remove the hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Capitol .x.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Capitol .xi.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and great spasm, then cauterize that which we have said which has immediate paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	When the cause of melancholy is superfluous diminishing to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him to drink water which softens the head of the patient according to what has been said in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	When the cause of melancholy is superfluous diminishing to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then remove the hair from the patient's head, and then make a decent burn on the circle, and do that in the middle of the head
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	When the patient is conscious and does not faint, and is held in all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Capitol .xii.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is told to you that the commencement of water in the heel for the spasms which we have mentioned in the division, then begin and give him to drink the patient that which softens the head of the patient, and keep away from him all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the pointed cautery.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep away from the blood flow of the saint when it is cauterized; and if you see that there is blood flow of the saint, stop any medicine, which is for you possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And indeed I know the knowledge which is in the extraction of arteries and in the exclusion of those and care for the blood flow of the saint
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And every vein is cauterized at the neck leaving two bones with two cauteries remaining in place.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cautery of ancient tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are ancient and have settled in the veins and arteries which are in the area manifested on the outside of the head and it has been verified that these are superfluous fatty phlegmas, then cauterize that which we have recounted in the chapter concerning the beginning of water which is in the gut of the eyes, and on the middle part of the head and on two cauteries on the neck leaving two temples, and two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you disagree with the addition, then cauterize that which is in all the length of the eyebrow on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery of the stench of the nose
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your physician has said what we have said in the division and does not benefit from your medicine, then you appear and give to the patient to drink three nights the broth of the sick; and approach his head and cauterize the middle and the olive tree
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And indeed cauterize that which is cauterized clove with two cauteries on the two eyebrows leaving the hair a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from the thread that you do not burn that one
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And concerning the clove this is the way to do it
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery of the softening of the eyelids of the eyes
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar; and this is the way to do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that over the two eyebrows a little bit with two cauteries throughout, and they will be elongated from the temples
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery is according to the amount of the eyebrow
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much your hand with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third part of the eyelid is adhered
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when it is converted to black spots and puts a finger on the eye
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the spots of the eye are converted to black spots even though you put a finger on the eye, cauterize in those two ways, that is either by doing it or with medicine that is a burn
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you do the cautery with fire, command the patient to drink until the spots disappear as those that are made by the flame; and if you put your finger there you must strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not painful until the spots are born
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and equalized, then pause the head of the patient over the gut of the eye, and approach again over the eyelid of the eye of the patient with a pinch, with the signal which is according to the figure of a dead leaf, and the beginning of the signal is near the spots
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And indeed pause for a while in the mucus in albumin of glue on the eye
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And indeed do the cautery in this way.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And indeed cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in green veins, until the surface of the heel which is like a dead leaf is consumed, all in appearance properly
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the completion of the work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the spots of the eye already being raised beyond the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and place it over his head for three days, and then pause over the area until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	May be if it returns for any reason, then do not hesitate, and gently palpate, for the hour it will be enough to cauterize it all as you did at first.</start_of_turn
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	May be if it swells in the palpation leave it, for the hour cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and is equal, and that the parts do not stink.</start_of_turn
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May be cauterize with medicine that commands the patient to rest the parts until they are prolonged and equal, and then apply a piece of lint like a feather of mirtle.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take sponges soaked in wine and cause life to go up one.</start_of_turn namely.</start_of_turn> or what is that, mix those things up, and do what is necessary so that it does not become inflamed; and expand a little of that liquid over the paper which is put like a feather of mirtle, and leave it over the wound edge in the belly, and put the patient's head in the chest.</start_of_turn
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And leave him say about the medicine and do that a little and do not leave it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which is in them just like fire.</start_of_turn
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore when he perceives that the other bite has ceased, the hour reads the medicine and do that which he was told to do; when the bite ceases, then remain the medicine and wash the wound with water; and consider that sometimes the swelling is already raised just like after being burned by the fire or incision, for the hour this is good; and if it does not return concerning the medicine over that place where it has not been pressed, and it is not wrinkled until the operation is healed and the wound is contracted.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the area around the border until the scar of the incision is eradicated, and then care for that which is left deaf or otherwise until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to know that you must keep your operation under strict surveillance so that in the wound does not fall again the medicine, and if the swelling is almost gone for several days or if any cause of the parts pressing on the wound comes back, the hour repeats your medicine over that place where the swelling is gone, just like you did at the beginning, and prevent it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the feather of mirtle.</start_of_turn
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the humors of men are diverse according to their magnitude and their smallness, and therefore according to what is done your contraction.</start_of_turn
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be ashamed of the way of teaching this in this art.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of the fistula which is in the tear duct of the eye.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure the fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases and you do not confer your care, the hour covers that you cauterize according to this manner: command the patient to rest their head on their chest, and keep the head of them any minister between the thighs in such a way that it is neither mauged nor agitated on the head.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause the limb immersed in water or in mucus over the eye.</start_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:</start_of_turn
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	that is, if it is conquered, like the shape of a cane or like the head of a pin, from one extremity to the other where the cauterization is done.</start_of_turn
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you go, penetrate from one extremity to the other.</start_of_turn
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, go like that too.</start_of_turn
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Better is he who is conquered to the work.</start_of_turn
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and take away the dirt and dry that.</start_of_turn
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, the hour opens that and extracts the pus from it.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And so I pause with the cautery over the area which is to be ignited, and I put a little distance between my hand and the patient's nose, so that my hand does not move or the patient becomes restless, and I pause the cautery in the gray matter and restore the sensation which has been lost.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the burn initially penetrates the bone, it is not good; otherwise, repeat the burn once or twice if necessary. Leave the area for three days, and then pause over that area and surround it with lint until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If several days have passed and it is still not healed, pause the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and recovered as recommended in the capital chapter.</end_of_turn>
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method for cautery of fistula is as follows: enter the fistula and cauterize there, and then pause in that crease of the skin which is the shape of the fistula. Then put the quantity of lead that you consider necessary on that area, and keep your hand firmly in place, without causing discomfort to the patient, so that the lead does not reach the nose; and keep the hand of the patient covered with wool or in water, so that the lead adheres to the fistula and heals that part miraculously.</end_of_turn
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the cautery and treatment that we have mentioned, it is not good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer medicine through the nose and reduce the fistula to the root of the nose as it comes in its proper place.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cautery of the wound.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many veins are cut accidentally in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you have cured those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not neglect your treatment, then I order you to burn a little cautery in this way:</end_of_turn
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the curvature of the area according to the thickness of the skin.</end_of_turn
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that immediately over those fissures until the burn reaches the base of the fissures.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautery of fistula in the mouth.</end_of_turn
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is swelling in the uvula or palate or the roots of the teeth, and there is pus and pain, and the swelling is broken, and the fistula is formed, and you do not neglect the treatment, then cover that burn according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and put that flame in the hole of the fistula, and keep your hand over it until the burning flame reaches the base of the fistula, and after that make an incision once or twice; and take care of that as we have said of the treatment until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the swelling is abscessed and is healed, it is not good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the location and remove the corrupted bone as recommended in the capital chapter.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of the teeth and mollification of the veins.</end_of_turn
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are swollen with humidity and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines and do not confer relief, then I order you to place the thumb of the patient on the tip of the tongue and then burn with the cautery in the form that you will be told, since you must keep the hand away from the tooth so that the burn does not reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And withdraw your hand and repeat the burn several times as you please.</end_of_turn
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And keep the patient's mouth full of salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then remove it, because the painful tooth is calmed and the softened gum is strengthened and the moisture that was corrupted is dried up.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery for toothache.</end_of_turn
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or is sharp or burning, or does not respond to treatment with medicine, then I order you to burn in two ways: either around the cow's foot, or over the flame.</end_of_turn
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cautery is applied to the border of the wound and a bundle of cows' hair is placed into the hole of iron. Then a coat is taken and wrapped over the extremity of the limb, and the bundle of hair is immersed in the wound and rests upon the painful tooth until it is inflamed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And in this way repeat the process until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse a bandage or cloth in the wound at the foot of the tooth, and place it over the painful tooth, and cover over that with the ignited iron until the iron reaches the depth of the curvature of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, more than the cautery with fire is to be aware of the quantity of charcoal or iron, and to make in the middle of them any swelling or discomfort, and that the degree of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And in this way cool the cautery in the shape of which it will come, and place it over the tooth and keep your hand over it until the cautery is inflamed; and do some herbs that the pain may be relieved today or tomorrow or the next day
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that after the application of the cautery the patient should fill their mouth with good fat and keep it for an hour, and then remove it; this is the way of the cautery.</start_of_turn>
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you can of the limb according to your ability.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capital letter X equals twenty.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cautery of exostoses.</start_of_turn
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When exostoses are of flexibility and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to digest them mildly, the hour you ignite the cautery you must take two limbs covered so that the smoke from the cautery does not reach the other limb, and place the ignited iron over that abscess a herb, and another if you wish to digest it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, the hour you pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it covered for three days and cover over it with a bandage until it is relieved of what the fire has consumed.</start_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care that in this way the wound and limbs and cloths are clean until they are healed.</start_of_turn
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the way of the cannula or give the cautery in this way is convenient.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxiii.	Capital letter X equals twenty-three.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery of the root of the tooth and the constriction of the jaw.</start_of_turn
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity is on the root of the tooth, and especially when it is cold, the hour you must evacuate the patient with laxatives at the beginning with medicines, and then cauterize that which is beyond the root of the tooth in the depressed area.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care that the cautery does not reach the bone or does not burn the pulp except for a little bit.</start_of_turn
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that which is beyond the other cautery is beyond the joint of the collar in the back of the vertebra of the tooth.</start_of_turn
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of the tooth must be like the preceding one.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care that what precedes is healed before it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capital letter X equals twenty-three.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery of toothache and cough.</start_of_turn
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and toothache are of cold humors and the toothache has neither fever nor spasm and is an old toothache, the hour you cauterize two cauteries over the spur of the lower jaw and between the teeth; and another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and the cautery must be like the preceding one.</start_of_turn
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make the puncture of the cautery with the point called puncture, the shape of which is described in the puncture of toothache.</start_of_turn
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And be careful that there are no cavities around those; and take care that what precedes is healed before it is healed.</start_of_turn
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And it has been said that three ramps must be made before the cautery is complete in this way: three cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol XXV
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Capitol XXV
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is displaced by the action of greasy humors and is not fixed at the time of the convalescence, you must displace it again when it has returned as it is customary. Indeed, as we have testified, when the head is displaced for the first time, you must first reduce the dislocation, and then restore the patient either forward or backward; and raise the knee which is in the groin area to the parts below your left hand if the joint is displaced in the groin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so on, ignite two cautery tips; this is the way to do it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And so on, cauterize the knee until it penetrates the other side; and the figure of cautery will be that of four cautery tips.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so on, according to the quantity of hair; and this is the way to do it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And each hair is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cautery tips
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And so on, keep your hand over the cautery for a while with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb will not be painful for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is necessary, then cauterize over the muscle at the base of the thumb or over several cautery points, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is expelled and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol XXVVI
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and fat humors in the stomach that expand when they touch the outside of the body and multiply the worms, and if you continue your treatment methods and do not confirm it, then you must place the patient face down on the bed and extend your hands and legs, and then cauterize with three cautery tips: on one cautery leave the feet for the quantity of a thumb at the base of the thumb, and on two cautery tips leave the two sides of the cautery, until you form a triangular cautery figure; and stretch between those that are not adjusted, which will cause great pain.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the breadth of the knee
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery should be as follows: thus one adds. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a circular cautery according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach punctate where it is sensitive: and that you mark on the stomach point according to the quantity you wish on the hair, and then cauterize that point there; and take care of that point with the care that precedes until it is healed
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol XXVVII
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cautery of the painful heel
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the heel due to cold or for fat or for excessive windiness that the normal heel expansion is extracted by excessive discharge, and when you have treated the patient as we have said and have not confirmed it, then you must place the patient face down on his neck and mark with three cautery tips according to this form and this quantity on the heel beyond the hip bones, holding the heel of the patient.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each two cautery tips should be according to the thickness of the finger, and the cautery tips should be according to the length of the limb that is being treated
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not tighten over the cautery wounds too much
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of liquid that is spurted is equal to the quantity of the big toe of the patient, and it is not more adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then keep him still, because he has already extended his legs, and lift his buttocks up high
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you can also cauterize these cautery tips with a pointed cautery, when it is at your skill and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care that you do not overdo the cautery, and that you cauterize the entirety of the heel so that you cauterize all the body and reach the intestines, because the heel here is subtle; and be careful that you do not burn.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Capital XVIII. From the perforation of the Achilles tendon with a cautery.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the tendon or apophysis in the foot is extruded and one wants to know if that apophysis is in the bone of the foot or in the sheath of the limb, if it is in the bone of the foot, the disease becomes heavy and the pain is acute.</end_of_turn>
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the sheath of the foot, with great pain which often makes doctors give up on the treatment.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore the disease must be supported on the heel; and immediately before the perforation of the apophysis, and then apply the cautery to the part which is similar to a rag in shape, as it is described in the other page.</end_of_turn
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And burn with the cautery until all the surrounding area is cauterized, until it reaches the cartilage, until the wound is healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other apophyses until they are healed.</end_of_turn
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this method of cautery except for those that a physician has studied in the art of medicine and in most of which many diseases have been overcome; indeed, in some of these the risk is great concerning this operation, but we must read what is written to us and it is better.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Capital XIX.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery of the plantar surface.</end_of_turn
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Say that the ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristotle on plantar frega are done according to this manner: take from the roots of Aristotle a piece of the length of a finger that is found, and which is of the thickness of a thumb.</end_of_turn
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immediately immerse that in oil and put it in the fire, and immediately cauterize for a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the heel towards the ankle; and with two small cauteries leave guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and two cauteries that decline between the fifth rib and the heel, declining slightly towards the parts behind; and another cauterization in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach; and three cauterizations on the back parts; and one cautery in that place which is between the two buttocks, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery that is between two buttocks.</end_of_turn
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not leave your hand over the cautery, but rather on the surface of the work.</end_of_turn
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And indeed we say that these are the ancient methods of those men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and fire, and apply it to that place which is between the ribs, until that apophysis is reached and is cured, as we have said in the apophysis of the foot.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this perforation with the cautery, do not be afraid, because it happens so often in the fistula that does not heal.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XXX.</end_of_turn
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the heel.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you have cured the disease of the heel according to what we have said in the division and you do not fear the treatment, then the cautery on it is done in three ways, which are all safe, namely that you make three or four incisions according to the length of the heel according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, as it has been described.</end_of_turn
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as that which we have said in the cautery of the foot.</end_of_turn
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not leave your hand over the cautery; and the disease must be even above the heel two.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cautery is that you ignite the cautery having two incisions, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the area which is at the end of the heel towards the heel bone so as to keep the heel from the left side of the disease.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such as to elevate the area according to the length of the limb, so that the cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And immediately withdraw the two incisions, ignite not, in that place where the area has penetrated the heel of the other part.</end_of_turn
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And immediately draw out the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you wish, cauterize at the root of the nail without causing three veins to bleed.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And immediately treat the cautery once it has bled for a few days, because it is different from the other previous causes of the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	End of Document.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery of hydropic [disease].
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The cautery does not take in hydropic disease but in alcinte indeed
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you have cured the hydropic with the methods of treatment which we have said in the division, and you do not confer your treatment, then know that four cauteries should be made around the belly and one on the stomach, and one on the heel, and two between the vertebrae of the two, and one in the root of the foot, and one on the stomach
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the spiciness of the wound
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And immediately place the cautery over so that it does not bleed for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery because it is necessary for them to understand two things, and stay with them until they have recovered
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery that is to be made on the belly is like a claw according to the shape of the lesion, and that which is to be made on the two olives is like the preceding one according to its shape
Capitol .xxxii.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of feet and the cushions
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in hydrosis and are filled with salty urine, know that the feet must be cauterized on the two sides of the foot except for the area between the heel and the ankle, and hold your hand over the cautery and do not move it; and immediately raise your hand, do not return it, because the salty urine remains
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is thus cauterized: And immediately make two cauteries on the two cushions, and on any other part make the cautery at the tip of the cautery that is cut
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be made according to the length of the cushion: leave one end of the cushion and the other under the middle of the cushion; and make two cauteries on every cushion
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any urine may drain from it
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And immediately treat with those causes which we have said
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the chest
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the chest is cold and humid because of the cold humors that enter, it is the digestive and retaining virtue, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured by the methods of treatment and is not necessary, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauteries that exhibit virtue, then immediately cauterize the great cautery over the great stomach as it was said before concerning the cautery of the stomach, and on the circle and four cauteries around the small intestine, and a claw-shaped cautery; and a cautery over the liver or two cauteries
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the exhaling humors and the patient tolerate it, then immediately cauterize that on the flank and on the abdomen, and firmly adjusting two cauteries on the stomach and near the navel, which is a perfect cure for the swelling of which you do not err
Capitol .xxxiv.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature behind ancient hemorrhoids or of gross cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by what we have said in the division and you do not confer your treatment, then immediately cauterize with three cauteries on the underside of the two vertebrae of the two small triangles, and remove the umbilical cord twice by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food is not digested, and that the face is sometimes pale, then immediately cauterize that on the stomach with a great cautery as it was said before; and one on the heel and one on the chest, and a claw-shaped cautery; and keep the cautery for some time open, and immediately treat it so that it is healed
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Burn with the cautery from the heel towards the toes, and immediately remove the black eschar.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you burn the heel, immediately remove the cautery from the area that is like nails.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Return the burning cautery between the toes of the affected limb, and place your hand over the area until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do two incisions, if there are two, because if they are great, then burn each one as we have recounted, and immediately care for those which cause them from the burns until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you burn with a great cautery on anything, it is better to delay treatment
Capitol .xxxvi.	The treatment is finished.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	When fistulas are caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, they are beneficial in nature and disappear in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is terrified, whether he is healthy or sick.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in the nature that is old, corrupt the blood and putrefying humors, it is better that one tries to cover it up rather than uncover it, and immediately surround the quantity of the depth of it as much as one can with the front part that one is trying to save.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Like nails
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And immediately put the burning cautery on the fistula, according to the quantity with which the attempt is made.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat this process until the corrupt parts have been consumed, two or three times, according to the quantity of your need
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula is in the bladder or the belly, immediately guard the area of these organs; do not proceed until the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And immediately care for the area until it is healed
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and if the matter has been removed from it, and you remain like this for a long time, know that it is already completely healed
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not taken away from it, know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it, or that it will come to be remembered in its area
Capitol .xxxvii.	The treatment is finished
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	About the cautery of the tonsils
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the tonsils there is pain due to cold or excessive wind, and in order to relieve the patient’s suffering, it is necessary to burn over the tonsils with a cautery over each tonsil where there is a visible bluish discoloration.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And burn with little distance between them, so that there will be three burns in a row, and therefore will be more beneficial
Capitol .xxxviii.	The treatment is finished
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	About the cautery of the bladder
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is swelling in the bladder due to cold and humidity and the patient does not retain the urine, it is necessary to burn in the lower part of the bladder near the pubic bone, on the side of the little toe, and on the other side of the uterus.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each burn is according to the degree of the swelling; and burn with two cauteries if necessary
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the burn must be made deep enough
Capitol .xxxix.	The treatment is finished
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	About the cautery of the armpit
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is swelling in the armpit due to cold and humidity, and the armpit is painful and the menstrual blood is corrupted, and it is delayed in its discharge, and there is pain due to the heat of the armpit, it is necessary to burn the area with three cauteries around the navel, as we said concerning the bladder; and with a burn over the lower part of the shoulder, or with two burns. The burn must be deep enough
Capitol .xl.	The treatment is finished
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	About the cautery of dislocation of the ankle
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus humors spread to the ankle joint, and cause swelling of the limb, a sign of this is that the space between them is prolonged compared to their usual position.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The ankle joint is displaced towards the side which is painful
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, when you cauterize the painful area of the ankle, do so in a circular fashion, since you have already recognized that this is an inflamed area, and in order that the surrounding area does not suffer further damage.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery which follows is the shape of the incision of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then do three cauteries with an olive-sized cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be performed according to the amount of spiciness of the entire area; and pay attention to those that are healthy.
Capitol .xli.	End of text
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle, caused by cold and moist humors, the disease is cured with what has been said above and not by confections, and when it has passed, you should take care that the patient does not have excessive humors in the body, but rather that you cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery is two-fold: either with medicinal powders or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Thus in two learned methods, one of which is to cauterize over the ankle with three triangular cauteries as follows; and do it with sufficient depth
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the distance between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of the finger, and if it is an olive or a large cautery
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some physicians cauterize over the middle of the ankle along the edge of the ankle bone because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference which precedes the shape of the ankle dislocation, and which is a continuous circle and burns away the spiciness of the entire area
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cautering in the case of pain that is limited to the ankle and does not extend to the space between the thighs
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends to the space between the thighs, then do two cauteries on the surface of the thigh over the painful area, and one cauterization over the hip for four fingers a little below the waistline.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cautery is too severe, and the depth of the cautery is according to the amount of spiciness of the area
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the disease extends as far as the feet, then cauterize here where the pain is felt with three or four cauteries or as many as you deem necessary
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the disease extends to the thighs, then do one severe cautery here where the pain is felt
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep in mind in all cauterization that you do not burn nerves or great vessels, and that by this you do not cause further damage or contraction of the disease.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	I have already seen several of these who, having cauterized over the hip and completed the cauterization, had the thigh bone inflamed until the tumor achieved the foot, and the bone was perforated and corrupted throughout the limb
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Therefore, take strong stomach acid, and take care of death.<end_turn>
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places, cauterize each one according to this method.<end_turn>
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And they say the wise men of ankle cauterization are like circles of iron whose circumference is the measure of a palm; and the depth should be as deep as the kernel of a date or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And join those circles so that they form a third; and the distance between them should be equal to the thickness of a nail; and these circles should be closely bound to each other; and this is their shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Do the same with fire ignited in the firebox so that it smokes and sparks, and keep your hand steady over the ankle, with the disease resting on the heel of the foot.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so cauterize with three cauteries around the circumference of the ankle
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And so keep that area for three days; then plaster that area around the edges and leave the wound open for several days; and finally care for that which is inflamed until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Indeed Albucasis: or, friends, in this sort of cautery we have little experience, and for that reason few have found what is useful regarding it.</end_of_turn>
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Moreover of the many cauteries that we use, this one is the most painful, and find in this one the place of its action.</end_of_turn>
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Moreover of the many cauteries that we use, this one remains with medicines as long as two circles are made having a hole pierced in the middle through which the contents of the bag escape; the length of the burn on the surface of the limb should be two hazelnuts or so.</end_of_turn
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between the great toe and the quantity of thickness of the finger; then open up the space below and above, and keep it filled according to this measure:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And so place your hand over the ankle of the patient and compress your hand over the ankle; then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that which is in the centre should be like that of a small fire, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the pain of the patient the bite and the swelling of the limb — for that other bite is like fire — until the bite ceases.</end_of_turn>
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And so lift up your hand with the instrument and wash the warm water from the whole ankle with cold water.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And so keep that area for three days and pause on that border until the blackening of the swelling has disappeared, and leave it open for several days, and care for it until it has healed. This is the end of the treatment.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And finally care for that which is inflamed until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the groin or the thigh, keep the limb in such a position as to contain water as is done in the ankle swelling.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of warm water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.</end_of_turn>
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and caustic not extinct of both parts, take one part each, and grind them together and pause in a new water from which the part that remains is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters into it.</end_of_turn
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause for a while the other water of the wave sent another wave coming, and get on that alkali and caustic alive from lukewarm water which takes those for a finger, and when you have compressed those with the thumb for good compression, and leave the rest that comes out of the water sharp in the part of the foot to the wave going out.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And so adjust all that water, and get another caustic alive and another alkali renewed, because that every hour that it is left without movement causes strong pain, which is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because this operation is like fire.</end_of_turn
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so of the many medicines which are cauterized widely, some are like turmeric and alum, and caustic like vinegar that is dissolved in water, which are more useful and less harmful than those that are pure.</end_of_turn
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And thus relates an ancient man the operation and care with which the pain of ankle and sciatica is cured, and magnifies more than enough to be of that, and says that no other care is necessary, and that it is healed by a single bath as recommended, for that strong thread in the bath already suffices for that.</end_of_turn
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it should be taken of certain green herbs, and if it is not found green, take recent figs; and do not grind it with a little gray, and put it on the ankle in which the pain is, or in the groin, or in the thigh, and bind it.</end_of_turn
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it on for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient can tolerate of the swelling.</end>
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And so put that in the bath and therefore when the limb is tanned, take that out into the sun, because the pain ceases and it is healed.</end_of_turn
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary to use all of these cauteries with these medicines, but only for the evacuation of the limb.</end_of_turn
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover I say that when the vein of the goat is cut, the cautery is performed; take advantage of this well; and make the cautery in this manner: take wool and soak it in oil against the cold, and put it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And thus take a dry goat's horn and burn that which is within until it is fat; and then place it on the wool and read the extent until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And do the same again, and do not cease until the sensation of the biting pain has reached the ankle and rests the pain
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery of two pains
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some causes of joint pain are in two parts, as in the case of inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for such causes as these, by infusion of fiery and humid matter
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And do not burn except for this single kind which is fat for the effusion of fiery matter
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore cover, and evacuate the evil with small pills placed under the pain, which should be fat on the two parts where the pain is three lines according to their width, because they are not to be attempted in any line or to cauterize or burn more, according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the treatment
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cautery be fat with cautery of points
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, burn with three cauteries or with four in the middle according to this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXIIC
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of the cautery at the beginning of inflammation
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease affects small children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that it affects their bones and causes them to bend forward and elevate and move awkwardly
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And also in the back one finds a slippage of the vertebra of the two and the ribs of the same which already begins to dominate over the other vertebrae
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you are sometimes in this situation and you wish to prohibit it, then burn that which is circular according to this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that it surrounds the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra equalling
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, burn in the circumference of the vertebra with two point cauteries or three
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And take care of the area until it is healthy with the water that we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Take care that the cautery is not administered in inflammation that is fat for spasms of nerves
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery of gout and of joint pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout is cured by means of treatment and the pains are not left, the pain is removed by the cautery
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you burn that close evacuation in the circumference of the foot joint with two point cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the burn be olive oil in which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise within the bones or to the other joints, and when these things happen, then burn that which is over each bone with three cauteries or over the whole part with this olive oil cautery
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if these cauteries are not enough for you, then burn that which is over your hand with the cautery without causing too much damage to the surrounding area, and send for the physician who has the knowledge of the disease
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain increases in the bone and the two together, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the previous chapter
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only on one side and is severe, then prick in the circumference of the bone as if it were a wheel, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in these places, then prick on the circumference of the bones over each rib and over the nail of the hand
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pain suddenly increases in the joints and nearby tissues, or if it affects the bones or muscles, it is customary to cauterize them throughout their extent.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient with excessive force, but rather with good regimen and the application of medicines, for if it is good regimen and the inflammation is calmed, it is evacuated with this pointed cautery without harming, God willing.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery of ruptures.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the bone is fractured in the ankle and saying the bones are loosening from the heel bone, and when this is imminent, then command the patient to lie still in bed and use soft materials so that the wound does not worsen from the belly of the foot.</end_of_turn
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient between your thighs on the bed, and command them to keep the foot away from the bed until the bone is set or the heel bone or the bone and the marrow appear fractured.</end_of_turn
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And return that which is between the thighs, and touch the fracture on the fifth bone with a sign that resembles the half of a circle to the upper parts of the body.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus ignite the cautery, of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is hot and gets sparks.</end_of_turn
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</end_of_turn
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And thus suspend the cautery on that sign with your hand over the cautery, and do this until you have set the fifth bone within the middle of the foot; and repeat this until you have achieved this in the first attempt within the bone.</end_of_turn
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And watch diligently of the color of the intestine during the cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient no comes any death or other great harm.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have finished the cautery do not neglect the bone, do not trust your operation.</end_of_turn
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And that the cautery of children be subtle according to their age and measure.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the area of the cautery for three days with borders so that the burn of the fire is healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those who are beside him until they are healed.</end>
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should rest on the bed for forty days until the area is healed and the wound is closed.</end>
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And that you abstain from nourishing him according to the length of time of his recovery, and that the intestine does not escape from the effort to recover.</end
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to take him away after forty days, administer him nourishing things suitably, and keep him for another forty days.</end
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be mindful of work and the replenishment of food and drink, and of a harsh voice, for when you use this regimen of healing the whole patient will be healed.</end
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the healing of fractures in other parts of the body, and so from the beginning, and you will know that when you cauterize the fracture of that with which we have spoken, round as much as it is, and that which is exhumed from the marrow just like the third part of it; and take care of that which we have said, and do not be negligent.</end
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said that the first fracture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is signed with a touch.</end>
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and is stopped like a line that is further from the width of the fracture, and another line from the heel; and put your hand on with a nail cautery, because the first cautery is more curious and better.</end<end_turn>
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLV.</end>
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cautery of torsion.</end
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the limb is twisted due to an accident or for percussion, and pain persists for a long time and you do not feel any improvement with treatment with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.</end
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	The cautery should be performed according to the size and shape of the member, its hardness and elasticity, and the location of the twist and the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first cautery is not successful, do not hesitate to repeat it; for it is often the case that these pains are caused by points on the limb itself, which must be burned close to the source of the pain so that the disease is cured.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery of leprosy.</end_of_turn
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some authors burn the cautery excessively, with great enthusiasm, while others do not burn it enough; and often it is the leprosy which is caused by the putrefaction of fat and melancholy.</end_of_turn
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is acute or chronic; and cure the former with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one at the back of the head, over the eyebrows; and two on the temples; and one on the nape of the neck or on the shoulder.</end_of_turn
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, place your hand over the cautery a a little distance from the bone so that a small wound is left, from which the scales will be loosened; thus the emission of thick vapor will be alleviated from it; and burn over the heel as required.</end_of_turn
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears to be manifest, then it is necessary that you burn in addition to those cauteries which we have said in the head; and burn over the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over the two cheekbones, and two over two vertebrae of the neck, and five over the vertebrae of the chest, and one over the breastbone, two over the armpits, one over each armpit, two over the elbows, two over the muscles, and two on the tendons of the legs; and burn over all the joints of the toes and feet, and over every nail of the toes, and over the sockets of the teeth.</end_of_turn
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And take care not to burn the nerves which are on the thigh so that you do not burn those.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And many are cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the heel and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the heel.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Remember that the more cauteries you make, the greater the benefit and the greater the benefit; and remember that the body is already stupefaited by the disease, so that it does not feel pain even when it is being cauterized.</end_of_turn
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And take care that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and the joints as it is preceded by the species of the instruments.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And finally, take care of the cautery with flour of barley mixed with honey and with another care which is useful until it is cured.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cautery of stupor.</end_of_turn
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is stiff or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils and plasters, and is not cured, then you burn that stiff limb with cauteries as it deserves, according to the greatness of the limb or the smallness of it.</end_of_turn
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the cautery should be made through the thickness of the hair a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And finally, take care that it is well healed until it is cured.</end_of_turn>
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And many are cauterized for any sleep that has arisen in the toes and the feet, and in the vertebrae of the neck and you will see the sensation of the nerves that are in that limb and it will be relieved of the sleep.</end_of_turn
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume anything except that which is learned in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cautery of carbuncles that is rotting.</end_of_turn
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When carbuncles are old and do not yield to the touch of medicine, then you burn over that with a cautery a little distance from the hair root until the whiteness and the color of it are changed, and the color of it is changed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And apply a that a mixture of barley broth and lentils with roasted oil and rue leaves, and sage of Columb or rue of Yronde, take half of each and mix them all together, and apply a bandage and keep it in place until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	And apply to that a mixture of barley broth and lentils with roasted oil and rue leaves, and sage of Columb or rue of Yronde, take half of each and mix them all together, and apply a bandage and keep it in place until it is healed.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and swells, then cauterize that part which protrudes in a circle around the area which is affected, as if it were swollen
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And say the learned that it is cauterized behind the outer cautery in the middle area; but in my opinion it is not seen here, because I believe that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen several veins that have been cauterized in this way.</end_of_turn>
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize in the circle around that which has been mentioned above, or at the most cauterize the root.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .li.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	When cancer begins and swells, then cauterize that part which protrudes in a circle around the area which is affected, as if it were swollen
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adubilati are delayed in maturity, and this is because of excess fatness, or for the state of the illness, because it is old in decrepitude, or for little sickness, or for the time, and you wish to hasten the maturity of the adubilati; then cauterize in the circle of that little puncture marks; and immediately lay that which hinders its maturity.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you wish to make a perforation of that which is to be cauterized, then do so in the middle of the adubilati where the vein appears; and leave that in the middle of the adubilati until it has pierced the cord.</end_of_turn
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize in that place that is further away, to relieve the limb of the arm; and immediately care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	When cancer begins and swells, then cauterize that part which protrudes in a circle around the area which is affected, as if it were swollen
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a walking corruption in the limb, which consumes that which is like fire eating dry wood.</end_of_turn>
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if sometimes that corrosion in the place where you suffer pain you cauterize with fire, then you must know how many nails you must put in that place according to how much it is corroded.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And immediately cauterize all that remains until you have eradicated all the corruption and there remains no cause of it.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And immediately lay that which hinders its maturity.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And care for that which incites fatness.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the carbuncle has not healed, it is not good; rather do it again over that which is rotten in the corrupted places.</end_of_turn
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated in various ways by acute medicine, which is half in the place of cauterization.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But fire cauterization is more dangerous with regard to the wound.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the care of it with acute medicine in the division, so take that which you find convenient.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	When cancer begins and swells, then cauterize that part which protrudes in a circle around the area which is affected, as if it were swollen
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many veins in the lower parts of the foot are affected by the disease which is called claw; it is a great cause, made by swelling, which fills the foot; and it is treated in two ways, with fire and with cold water.</end_of_turn
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But fire cauterization is more dangerous with regard to the wound, for it sets the cauterization on fire like a punishment for an offence, which is done with a needle according to the quantity of the claw which it contains, and with fine stripes.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And immediately pause the flame over the knee, and then rotate your hand over the area of the knee until the cautery reaches the depth of the knee.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it like that for three days until it begins to swell
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And immediately plaster that with fresh herbs moistened with salt, and leave the plaster on that for one night, so that the cause of the pain will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And care for the limb with ointment of generative ointment until it is healed
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not recover, and black spots appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer in those cavities with water, that is to say, take a sponge of willow or ivy or elderberry, and put that on the knee; and withdraw a little quantity of cold water from the sponge, and hold your hand, and rotate that with your hand all around, and press the margin of the sponge on the root of the knee, and reintroduce the cold water through the opening of the root; and wait for the patient for a little the bitterness of the cold water for an hour, and then remove that, because the knee will then be freed from its root
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And so be with those who are with you until they all go away from all of whom they are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And care for those who remain after the root of the knee has been eradicated by the warmth of the ointments that cause the knee to swell
Capitol .liiii.	The end of the document is not included in the provided text.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is some tremor due to cold in the nerves or for excessive heat, or for another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five over the spines of the two, between each spine with a cautery; and with a cautery on the feet and on the stomach
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor will be calmed and the health of the feverish disease will be restored.
Capitol .lv.	The end of the document is not included in the provided text
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery of the accidental burn of the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there is spilled blood in the body, and there are pus-filled boils which are caused by corrupt thick matter; therefore it is necessary at the beginning when it appears to cauterize over the whole head of the fistula with a fine needle and a vessel of mercury, the extremity of which is extended to the fire; or at the root of erotology longua; or with a slow cautery
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some boiled wounds are cauterized immediately at the beginning of their discharge in this way; and do not be afraid, for by interrupting the excess you will make those whole and healthy again
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, you must also take care that there is no further bleeding during the evacuation with flebotomy
Capitol lvi.	The end of the document is not included in the provided text
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery of the flux of blood from an accidental incision of an artery
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many veins bleed excessively from an incision of the plague which must be removed, or from an incision of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and in like manner it is difficult to stop that bleeding
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when such a thing happens, immediately take your hand to the orifice of the artery, and pause over that until you have stopped the bleeding from the wound; and do not leave it until the bleeding has ceased
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately pause the fire of the cauteries a few and large, for many, and blow over those until they are no longer lit
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And immediately take from those a little or a great one according to the limb and the wound from which the artery has been broken, over that vein tightly holding back the bleeding until the wound has closed, and withdraw the cautery until it is gone and restrict that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you have withdrawn the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from the cauteries which are prepared in the fire and do not stop doing that until the blood is restricted
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And take care that you do not burn the nerves that are there, and that you come over the patient with another malady.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible in those situations to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, except by four methods: or by cauterizing as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the limbs are burnt and the blood is restricted, or that it is bound with thread or ligature for strong structure, or that it is supported by medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and that it is strengthened by dusting with powder or constriction descending
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May he who administers gentle restraint from them, and stricture with a drape or by placing the cause in a position that combats and prevents recurrence, shall not cause further discomfort but rather benefit.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If he must go without a physician or medicine, when the hand or foot indicates the orifice of that vein as we have said, understand that the patient is at great risk of dying from the plague; do not delay; and having ascertained that the patient is not in imminent danger of death, sprinkle the wound with cold water of great coldness until the patient is congealed and hardened; and more than this do nothing unnecessary.</end_of_turn>
Comensa la segonda partida.	Continue with the next sentence of the treatise.</end_of_turn>
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	From incision and perforation and winds and of phlebotomy and of plagues and of their signs.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are Albucazi's words.</end_of_turn>
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases in which catarrh of the mucus is convenient and useful, and medicines that combat it, and the occasions and causes of these, and the instruments necessary for their forms, have been mentioned; and we have ordered the chapters of the subordinate parts of the head to the feet.</end_of_turn>
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter according to that method, in order that what is required may be relieved, as it has been demanded.</end_of_turn
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since we are about to begin, hear, children, that in this chapter is for terror what is in the first chapter of cautery.</end_of_turn
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, take great care, for in the operation which is in this chapter many patients have perished from excessive evacuation of the contents of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of an ulcer or emptying of the plague or extraction of the stone or incision of the kidney.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these things are accompanied by fear and trembling and in most of them death.</end_of_turn
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I admonish you that you take no unnecessary risks, for some veined patients have perished from your methods.</end_of_turn
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is better for you that you depart from your disease and are lighter than to bring death upon your patients, and to increase the length of their disease, and for the fear which signifies death.</end_of_turn
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And this is what I give you to know and tell you, that you hope for that health, and your disease is treacherous.</end_of_turn
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to any of those things from which this practice is composed; and your caution should be greater than your desire and your boldness; and do not presume any cause except for that which you certainly know to be useful, and from which you can expect a blessed success.</end_of_turn
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the care of all patients the prognosis and indication of which is converted to health, for in that is your aid in acquiring fame and memory, of the benefactor and of glory.</end_of_turn
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God in you inspires understanding and does not command you to go against his direction and protection, for he is in your hand.</end_of_turn
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to the order of the chapter of cautery, from the care of the head to the feet, in order that what is required of you from this and from which you have need be alleviated.</end>
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of the water which is contained in the head of children.</end_of_turn
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this disease is not found in adults, but in children when the yolk of the egg is still in their head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And many times the cause of this is hidden, which is not known.</end_of_turn>
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease in adults; and in all those whom I have seen it has carried death along with it, and for this reason I have given up on it.</end_of_turn
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, his head was always so large that he could not rest his head upon his chest, and that even when he was lifted up he could not rest his head for the greatness of his head, and that in addition the moisture increased so that there was death.</end_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either thickened between the cartilage and the bone, or is thickened outside the bones over the brain.</end_of_turn
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation is undertaken when the moisture is between the navel and the hip bone, and the afterbirth is scanty, it is necessary to make a cut in the middle of the thigh with a fissure two finger-widths wide, so that the moisture may escape.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more abundant and the afterbirth is greater, two incisions are made according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the moisture remains in the bones, this is an indication that the head of the bone has been fractured from the root and the water is squeezed out when you compress that area with your thumb against the surrounding parts, and it is not blood that you see.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Therefore, three incisions are made in the middle of the thigh according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And so extract all the moisture; then strengthen the incisions with strips and cushions; and give him wine and oil to drink every day, and remove the ligatures and cure the wound with attempts and ointments, and strengthen the thigh equally; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.</end_of_turn>
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another method of incision which considers the size of the afterbirth and the collection of water, since some veins are more prominent in the occipital region, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the afterbirth appears and the water collects, and make the incision as wide as possible.</end_of_turn>
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	Note that you must not pierce the artery, and be careful that the blood does not clot; keep the patient calm for the evacuation of moisture.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .ii.	End of Document
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Concerning the incisions of the arteries which are close to the ankles, they are called hilasseyssae.
Capitol segon.	End of Document
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are clots or abscesses on the heels or toes, and the swelling has subsided, and you do not trust in the cure of the medicines, the best cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.</end_of_turn>
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore, when you wish to make the incision of those, the patient must keep his head still, and press firmly on the area around the bone with rough hands to expose the arteries, and strengthen the patient's chest with some support; and consider where the vein is located; and do not go over the places where some of the veins which are close to the ankles are depressed, and so on until you reach the bone.</end_of_turn
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And so on with the other arteries, make an incision at the apex of each segment of bone which is acutely painful at the incision, and as wide as the head of the thigh.</end_of_turn
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, after you have made the incision, close the artery and join the incisions to the surrounding parts.</end_of_turn
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when any vein is incised, blood is ejected with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.</end_of_turn
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	Even if the artery does not appear at the incision, it is necessary to measure the circumference of the ankle three fingers wide, and do so cautiously, and make the incision into the bone.</end_of_turn
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And as for the amount of wine to get from the blood, it is approximately one cup.</end_of_turn And take no more or less than this, according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the artery.</end_of_turn
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the wound, and therefore if there remains any cause of swelling on the bone, the incision must be made to prevent further clotting.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with cushions and silk threads, and cure that which is inflamed until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .iii.	End of Document
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Concerning the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.</end_of_turn
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are ancient accidents of embolism or acute wounds which are aggravated by agricultural humidity or by the quality of the lacerations of the temples, or even ancient fevers which resemble these, and when these cannot be treated by the methods of medical care, we must resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or the cauterization of these veins as we have shown.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient should lie down on the side for which they are in the temples; and understand that the artery which appears in the temple is the one which you have shown by your finger, and that it is hidden only in a few people because of its violence.</end_of_turn
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If the cause of the disease is hidden, the doctor should suspect a strong dose of madness in the patient; and immediately let the patient's tongue swell with a rough or bitter substance or evaporate the tongue with lukewarm water until the madness subsides.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take the patient's tongue, which is the sign of this disease.</end_of_turn>
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And immediately uncover the belly and extract that which is above to the navel and extract that from the flanks until you have extracted that from the belly and discovered that which is under the tunic which you have left behind, from every part.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Maybe if the artery is subtle, wrap that around the nail, and immediately cut a piece according to the quantity by which the limbs are swollen, and do not touch the blood, for if they are not cut they will not be cured of anything.</end_of_turn>
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And immediately evacuate blood from the vein somewhat.</end_of_turn Until three times.</end_of_turn>
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the wound is great, the doctor should cover that with two layers of cheese or silk thread, and do not leave it exposed until the decay has subsided and the wound has consolidated.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And immediately remove the excess which is between two bones; do that at that hour or at another time.</end_of_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	Or if you wish, cauterize that which is pointed at the bone which is pointed at the nail until the limbs are swollen, and leave the work in its place.</end_of_turn
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better for the disease if the patient has a fever or is of scaly complexion; because the cautery is of those causes which help to dry out humors, and therefore is better in summer.</end_of_turn
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover immediately the extraction of the arteries which you saw on the ankle, and keep it covered with fine powder, and immediately apply either cure with dry medicines which cause the flesh to dry out or with poultices until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working you see that blood is flowing from the wound, then immediately stop that bleeding, either by cautery or by tying off the artery, or by packing the wound, and hold your hand over the wound until the bleeding has stopped.</end_of_turn
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of these causes are present, the doctor should wait until the wound is consolidated, and then apply lukewarm water to the wound until the pain subsides, and be strong as before.</end_of_turn
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more curious in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein at this point having two clips, because you have marked the two points at the attempt, and you have left out the parts in between, until you reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that it is elongated what is between the limbs, which are not consolidated at all by this cautery.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the way of cautery:</start_of_turn>
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the acute of the two clips is perfect.</start_of_turn
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Better yet if the acute is less than two clips, because if the acute is too great it will burn the flesh too quickly.</start_of_turn
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness, keep the fire of the flame in those and the flesh is split with delight.</start_of_turn
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in all work and is lighter.</start_of_turn
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two clips is the quantity of the thickness of the finger.</start_of_turn
Capitol quart.	End of book/treatment.</start_of_turn>
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care of the limbs of the acute and sour humors of the bones.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the sour humors are like that, and the veins which are over the head of the femur are compressed, and do not comfort in any way the treatment of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already shows signs of decay and sits in front of walking like a swarm of ants, and the bones of that limb are extended, hummed out more than they were known to be, and the skin is scaled over by the acute of the tears, the old methods of treatment in this operation are useless, and one must apply this treatment with space.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch out the limbs which are in front, and immediately make three incisions equally distant according to the length of the face.</start_of_turn
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the wound falls two fingers: one wound be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the face, and the second according to the length of the movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard your hand from the start of the arteries which are in two lines, and extend your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of any incision is such that the quantity of three fingers can be adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge dressed or dry cloth moist with which you will dry the wound
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then interlace the sponge of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the part of the temples to the second incision
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all that whole cord that is between two incisions on the lip that is over the bone, and then make that which is over the bone move into the second incision
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this sponge and enter through the first incision another instrument which is called cautery, sharp from one side and blunt from the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the bleeding of that sharp from over the vein that is beside the cord, and the bleeding from the bone that does not reach the os, and fill that up until it reaches the middle of the wound, and close with that all the blood vessels that go from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May be the incision is continued up to the cord, and then make that which is in the middle of the wound enter into the other incision
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the wound has healed as much as possible, press the parts of the wound together with a bandage
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And pause in any wide wound for an old coat, and pause over those dusts covered in wine and oil and vinegar, and anything that does not cause pus to come out of the cautery.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and give great abundance of lukewarm water or tepid, and take care that there is no oil or vinegar remaining, and other things that may cause the wounds to become inflamed.
Capitol .v.	End of book.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the care of the eyes for the care of the limbs descend from the parts that are distant from the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When at some time some acute catarrh and continuing, and sometimes the limbs of the patient extend slightly, and already regarding them it is necessary to take care, and the ulcerated palpebras and their sockets are for this reason, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent vomiting, for these accidents that the matters and catarrh do not go out but from blood vessels from the distant parts proceed
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that the patient should chew less aggressively, and then make an incision in the middle of the face, a little for the width (and begin with the incision of the left temporal until the right temporal; and let the incision be over the bone; and extend your hand from the tears of the temples which are bitten by the chewing), until the bone is exposed
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Excise all the wound with sponge or dry cloth and then replace between the two lips of the wound with an old coat or cloth of lint
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then stretch out the dust covered in wine and oil for so that it does not cause pus to come out of the cautery
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When you have removed that and you see that the abscess has already diminished, then take care that the bones are cold until they begin to naturally regain their flesh, and take care of that which regulates the excessive discharge that makes the flesh wane, like if you take two barley grains and four coriander seeds and mix them together, or like if you make plaster of them and administer it to these wounds that have lost their flesh
Capitol .vi.	End of book.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the care of that which comes out in the armpits.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that comes out in the armpits is of four kinds, that is, either a mineral stone or something resembling a stone, like iron and lead, or of plants like celery or beans, or a fluid cause like vinegar and wine and their like, or any beast
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone comes out in the armpit or any other cause that does not adjust or grow in the armpit, and stops the armpit in the sunlight, and if sometimes the stone, then distil in that any cause of olive oil or vinegar, and then administer the extraction of it, and make it vomit with condiment, and apply compresses to the area where the vomiting occurred
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And immediately stop the circulation of the ankle by pressing some pieces of lead or wool against it, and extend the ankle outwards, because the veins become swollen from these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not swollen, then give extraction with the instrument called epicaricary sponge, which is like this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is swollen with the sponge, do not do anything; but if not, then give extraction with a little incision of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if it is not swollen by this, then make a needle of gut and enter the extremity of the needle into the cavity of the ankle and close around the needle with wax and with plenty of ointment so that only the needle comes out.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And immediately extract from the belly with strong traction, because the veins become swollen as we have recounted
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Maybe if it is not swollen in this way, then take a burning brand or a cold compress and apply it to the part where the pain is, and keep it there for a sufficient time.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And immediately put it into the cavity of the ankle with ease, and immediately dry the ankle from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if it is not swollen by all the causes that we have recounted, then you should order that the patient be cauterized or given an antispasmodic drug
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cauterize that is to first heal the phlebitis of the vein and then extract according to the virtue of the instrument, and then make a small incision in the heel of the ankle and drain the black bile from the area before the area is cauterized.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the incision should reach as far as the heel bone, and when the bone is exposed, remove the cause of the pain with suitable instruments; and immediately close the incision with speed, and care for it until it is healed
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the ankle is one of the fatty substances that grows and inflates, give treatment and extraction; even if you do not obey my words immediately, I order you to take a little space in this way:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And give with that the excision of the fat that is causing the pain in the ankle
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not be surprised when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ankle, and keep it still in pieces, and immediately extract from the nails or with the sponge, or by incision as I have said, because the extraction is alleviated
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water in which the ankle is immersed, which should use for sternutation at the beginning, fill the ankle with some old rags, and hold over that ankle the part of the water which is causing the pain, and if it is swollen by this, do not do anything; but if not, take hold of the patient’s foot and ankle with your hands, and put on a pair of gloves, and with your hands break the bones in the ankle in one place and in the other place hit the ankle bone against the bone that is causing the pain.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop until all the water is swollen.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	and if the water is still swollen even then, take paper or gut and put one extremity in the ankle and extend the other extremity with fire until the most of the pain is gone.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put on another glove and keep the water so swollen until all the water is swollen, and then take out the bone that is causing the pain with a needle as it is called the extracting bone
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, in the extraction of beasts that are within that ankle, if it is small in size, push and hold it still, care for it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes a wound immediately, then give extraction with instrument and nails, and the cause of the pain is less severe than all the other causes that cause pain in the ankle.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of worms engendered in the ankle, when you have cured that which we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations, and you do not neglect your treatment, I order that you keep the ankle in the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore, if there appears here any cause of the worms, then give extraction with instrument or nails, but if no cause appears, take a needle and grasp the gut from the side and open it like this
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	The limb is introduced into the heel according to the quantity of suffering; then quickly withdraw and do so cautiously, making movements as slight as possible, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Even if you do not obey my order, the hour has passed and closed in the circle of the needle as we have said; the hour to administer the distillations which have already been excreted in the treatment of the worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.</end_of_turn>
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with the oil of medicines in the heel with this instrument of which this is the form:...</end_turn>
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of lead, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and put a pin through it.</start_turn>
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is like when it is necessary to make an incision in the curvature of the continental canula here.</start_turn
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the foot downwards properly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the limb, or juice of any herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines in the canula – and that is in the heel – and then introduce the ray around the foot downwards and press with your hand that which is over the compression of the limb until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the limb and the patient feels the oil adhering to the limb.</start_turn
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infiltrated in the heel is already scorched with fire a little.</start_turn
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep this in mind that the cause for which you distill in the heel should not be too cold, because the medicines of the heel do not suffer from that.</start_turn
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</start_turn>
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of the opia of the heels.</start_turn
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some veins of young children are sometimes seen swollen from the bites of large worms that do not pierce the skin; and this opiate in the meat of the heel for plague or for nothing in that; and this opiate is useful in the groin of the heel which does not always happen, and some are in the outer parts.</start_turn
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the groin of the limb, which does not always happen, is in the greatest difficulties of recovery.</start_turn
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you can make it happen, cover that you keep the heel of the patient towards the sun and rest in that.</start_turn
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if sometimes there is apparent opia, open that with the pointed cautery of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb in which it is small in latitude, of which one side is acute and the other is not; and the sponge is of two blunt lions so that it does not damage the heel.</start_turn
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And thus if the opia is for a wound born in the heel or in the meat of the limb, then take that which is blunt and cut that with great facility until all the wound is gone.</start_turn
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opia is in the groin of the heel, then take a blunt needle and burn that with a little fire, and then put that on the meat of the heel.</start_turn
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you smell opia in that which the patient finds with ease, for the gravity of the elevation, try to reduce the pressure of the limb with ease; and keep this in mind that you do not damage the nerves of the heel.</start_turn
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus keep the heel wrapped around the ankle according to the quantity of the breadth of the incision which you have enclosed in Egyptian unguent; and do that for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or that you take something and press that into the wound and sprinkle over it powdered alum and use of it; and if sometimes the heel is already blistered, then cover that which you take out and change that for another which you wrap in cerate that is useful with olive oil, until the wound is bled dry; and take care of that until it is healed.</start_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if there comes a flux of pus, then immerse sponge or bandage in cold water and put it on the heel, and use another care which restricts the flow of pus, which is said in the treatise on distillations.</start_turn
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.</start_turn
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the care of the athezil which is indebted to the eyelids.</start_turn
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The athezils which are indebted to the eyelashes of the eyes are some humid, and some dry.</start_turn
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore cover that you have those above your toes or on your ankles, and cut those above the base of your toes, and then pause over the areas that are sweating.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May it be that if pain comes from the flux of blood, then you cauterize those that are blunt lancelets underneath.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the better cautery is when the veins and blood vessels return when the cause of those matters has disappeared; and when they are cauterized with fire, those matters are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	End of text.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Great pain that comes to the eyelids of the heels.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Veins that are full in the eyelids of the heels cause any cause that is similar to great pain in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called great pain.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower eyelid and its detachment
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation for them is that you consider if the pain is due to them from the eyelid and is widespread throughout; and the cause of it is light
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore cut across that limb at the breadth, and then drain that throughout easily so that it escapes, and then suspend that which is on top and cut away that
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	May it be that if you do not find the beginning of the wound if you do not pierce the eyelid with a slight incision little by little, the pain will not be noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, the hour you adjust with suture; and care for that until it is healed
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, do not do too much harm for that which remains of it restores that and nourishes it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the pain is declining at the edges of the eyelid, you must shave the surface of the eye, the hour you remove the eye and suspend the pain that is on top, so that you do not see it again from the incision, and cut away that throughout, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, the pain will not be noticed in any cause
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then close the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the area until it is healed
Capitol .x.	End of treatise
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the care of the detached eyelid from the heel
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Ascirna is gray matter that is generated in the tunics of the detached eyelid, and especially in children, aggravates the heels of those who suffer from it, and prevents them from seeing the sun because the tears are mixed with them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so they sometimes wipe their faces all the time, and over their faces they sleep; and over their eyelids they put wet eyelashes, which already cover the inflammation, and the apparent imminence of pain is in the heel; and when you press on the area that you say, you find pain inside those
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And any way of operating is in that one in which the patient keeps his head still in the belly, and then you put a bandage on it and make a circle according to the amount that contains all the afterbirth, and then you remove that above that and cut through those that you say throughout so that it is added to the afterbirth in the middle of the circle, and then you make in the middle of that humidity that is incident upon the fissure at the breadth, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in a flabby body
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May it be that in the preparation cover that you cut through the whole cord until you reach the afterbirth, because in the most part of the processes of afterbirth through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract that which you wrap with cloths that you put between the thighs that you say at the edges and twist between the right and left hand until it is gone
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And keep in mind that you do not make an adjustment in the fissure for so that the humidity does not reach the heel and remove that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May it be that if it does not appear to you in the beginning of the fissure, may you adjust in the fissure a little thing that facilitates the afterbirth; and then extract that which we have said; and then cover with cloths and vinegar and pause over the area and remove those that are like dust
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so when they break salt and stop that in the concavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that until it is healed
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If the burn happens on the sole of the foot, the treatment is to plaster the burn until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	When the burn occurs on the sole of the foot, the treatment is to plaster the burn until it heals.</start_of_turn>
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	In the way of the handling of the wound.</start_of_turn
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the veins of the eyes dilate due to excessive heat or other causes, the eyes become dry and the vision becomes blurred, causing excessive tears and swelling of the eyelids. This is when the humors become thick and sticky, causing pain and inflammation of the eye. Treatment for this consists of cautery, acute medicine as described previously, excision with suture or cannas according to the physician's judgment.</start_of_turn
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you must hold the patient's head still; convert the eye of the patient with your left hand, and if it is converted, well and good; otherwise, insert a needle in the area where there is most sensitivity of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate deep enough, and when it has penetrated as far as the margin of the eyelid where the veins lie, then push the needle towards the inside of the eyelid, and convert the eye again.</start_of_turn
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Therefore, remove from the margin of the eyelid towards the outside the greater lacrymal vein with the greater lacrymal duct; then extract the needle and leave the eyelid covered with small pieces of lint or gauze, and put over the eye a compress like the figure of a laurel leaf.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it must be known that the figure must be such as to correspond to the degree of elevation of the eyelid, because this varies among people, and some people require that the large vein of the eye be more widely opened according to the degree to which the eye is swollen.</start_of_turn
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Therefore, place the compress over the two lines that you marked, starting from the greater lacrymal vein towards the smaller lacrymal vein.</start_of_turn
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the wound is extensive towards the veins naturally, like the greatness of a king.</start_of_turn
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the sponge in one of the two angles of the wound, and then remove the whole, and with the thumb adjust the two lips towards the gum or thread, and grasp the hernia, and remove the excess from around the nails with various means, as you wish, or do not cure.</start_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And repeat the suture of the nails every three days or four, and then cure the wound.</start_of_turn
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the dressing untied and suture, and cure the wound as it dries and contracts, because the eye is relieved of the pain of the wound and the swelling; in this way the suture is better. Therefore I recommend that you do not remove the old stitches.</start_of_turn
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in this case there is great solicitude for the patient, and it is a good operation, and do not be afraid.</start_of_turn
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another way of treating is to mark on the eye the figure like a laurel leaf, and then lift the eye with three nails secured together in this way.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible, take nails and make holes in the figure, and put one needle in the middle of the mark and the other towards the greater lacrymal vein, and the other towards the smaller lacrymal vein, and adjust between the nails with equal measure, and with the hand that is holding the eye elevated to the same height as the mark.</start_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and cure when it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If the burn happens on the sole of the foot, leave the burn covered with a compress and hold it still, and do not move it.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	All these herbs that are on the eye that cause them to swell, because of the heat or other causes, must be converted by means of the methods that we have mentioned; in this case, suture is not necessary.</start_of_turn
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The treatment with cannas is as follows:</start_of_turn
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eye and split the figure as I have recounted; and then make two cannas or two fine needles whose length is according to the length of the eye and the width of the wound is less than the width of the compress.</start_of_turn
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already opened at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.</start_of_turn
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajusta las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation in you be that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of you, and leave it in that which is between those two a little of ointment of lead, and ligate those until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not neglect to care for the cause of this, restriction; for if you leave it as it is, it will become worse at any time rather than better
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that case that softens like fennel, and embroil with the water in which they are cooked to a high temperature and seeds of lead, or ointment of iodine, which is liquefied with some oil, and immerse in that the wound, and care for that.</start_of_turn>
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your care is that you perforate at all times that it is not consolidated according to the form in which it began.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing other than a rectification of the swelling that does not restore the shape of the limb as it was before.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.</start_of_turn>
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the care of swelling that is beneficial in the palm of the hand.</start_of_turn
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This swelling that is beneficial in the palm of the hand, which is truly called swelling; and it is of two kinds, one natural, the other accidental.</start_of_turn
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is beneficial for wound or cut or burn or other similar things.</start_of_turn
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation of this is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and leave that in the flesh, and that you pass the thread from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.</start_of_turn
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh around the needle and hold that with the needle, and pierce with the needle at a wide space.</start_of_turn
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if you return the figure of the palm to its former state, it is not good; and if so, take the thread again and leave that in the indented figure, and over that convert the palm, and close the two incisions in the side of the palm of the hand.</start_of_turn
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two incisions make two angles of the incision, which have benefited within that they converge, and be of their benefit angle within that when they reunite be of benefit figure of them.</start_of_turn
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.</start_of_turn
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then hold the flesh that is around that quantity of the palm of the hand, so that the palm does not swell.</start_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and bind those with the thread of silk; and then care for those as we have said of the soothing medicines and the ointments that must be put on that it may heal.</start_of_turn
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the swelling has to be for wound or suture or burn, the hour covers that you make a flat incision over the area of the palm as it is said before.</start_of_turn
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the skin between two lips as we have said.</start_of_turn
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the care of swelling when it is detached or of the palm, that runs in the operation, according as it is prepared in the form of swelling, and that is in the form of various masses.</start_of_turn
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise surgeons always prepare any means possible for them to restore the figure to its natural shape, or rather from that, and that disease according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments that are at their disposal.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.</start_of_turn
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the palm to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.</start_of_turn
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs to several people at once that it is solidified the palm more than usually with the album of the hair, and that it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore you must remove the limb of the hand from the palm, and elevate it above that, or extend that with the nail.</start_of_turn
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you pierce the adhesion with a blunt needle, which is not at the acuity of the incisions, having made an obtuse point so that the disease is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the piece that does not cause the hair to fall out from its acuity.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be your incision such as to gently remove that adhesion until the palm is returned to its natural shape and that the adhesion is completely healed.</start_of_turn
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut in l’aygua.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate between the eyelid and the nail with forceps of lead, and place over the eye a bandage soaked in vinegar infused with oil, and on the third day use astringents until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the beginning of the nail and the swelling of the tear ducts.</end_of_turn
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Wisely that the nail is of two kinds, that is, either nervous or insensitive. The nervous is like a hard, smooth cylinder; or it is insensitive, resembling white solidified moisture, which when one touches it, or is forced to take it with a nail, is torn away and the nail does not adhere to it.</end_of_turn
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these species do not commence until from the greater lacrimal which goes gradually covering the eye and hinders the light and the movement of the eye.</end_of_turn
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way of working in the beginning of the nail is that the patient should sit up in bed, and touch their toes with their hands, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with a nail of little duplication and stretch it out to the parts below.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take a needle and enter into that a piece of hair of horse or of calf or of ox, or something like that, or thread, or a strong thread, or duplicate the extremity of the needle gradually and leave that in the middle of the nail, and pierce through that with the needle, and tie with thread the nail; and stretch that out to the parts below, and scrape with the skin the side of the nail which touches the pupil.</end_of_turn
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus keep that within the skin behind it.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And thus keep the incision near the root of the lacrimal with a soft sponge or with small forceps, and release the natural secretion of the lacrimal so that from the incision there does not flow continuous tears.</end_of_turn
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if necessary, cover the nail with the sun nail extended or with thread, as we have said, and approach it with a sponge of the kind mentioned above.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Beware that on the sponge do not touch the corneal membrane and that you avoid breaking it, and that the pupil is perforated.</end_of_turn>
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then pour a little salt or snuff of sulfur into the bath and leave it like that until the next day; and take care of that which covers until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is insensitive and cannot be pierced with the needle, or is not fixed in that nail, in that case this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed just as well as recommended in the division.</end_of_turn
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to perform an incision, then you must touch the limb of the patient and take a soft sponge of fine freul with acute friction according to this manner:</end_of_turn
am subtilitat.	with smoothness.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rare and is confused and sticks to that root, then do distill from your urine in the head of the patient by means of snuff or by means of vinegar or by means of salt trissated, and bathe the limb within the next day.</end>
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And approach again that operation until everything that is of it is removed, except that the contrary scab remains on the limb, for you must read that, and care for the beginning of the scab until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that reason until it is healed.</end_of_turn
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The swelling of the tear duct, if you notice it in the limb during the night, is suspended with a nail; and pierce that part of it, and do not finish the incision so that no tears flow from it.</end_of_turn
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And pour vinegar in the tear duct of the head and make snuff until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</end_of_turn
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of the armpit and of what is born of a limb adjusted in the limb.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some veins in the arms of the armpit are born with a rough skin, and are more than enough to cover the pupil, or approach or stretch over the eyelids and tightly compress the eyelids against the parts below and are fixed like a barrier.</end_of_turn
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation be that the patient suspends his head in the belly; and immediately open the heel of that and collect all the cartilage that is convenient at that time with forceps or with a vessel; and when that is done, break the cartilage little by little until everything is finished with the incision. Take care that you do not injure anything during the operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And as for the incision, do it at the place where we have recommended it at the nail, or with small forceps as are collected together according to the form of the thing in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when the incision is finished and the cartilage is collected, immediately pour salt over the wound, or sprinkle in the dust of burned alum, like the corrosive medicines, and rest your hand over the wound until it is confirmed that the bleeding has stopped
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there remains any cause of anxiety and the wound is not safe without cautery, and there is fear of further bleeding, then read the wound and care for the bleeding with water until it stops. Then repeat over that part that was operated on until it is healed, and in the meantime keep the wound adjusted as it happened in this case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	May it be known that we must not perform any other cure for the wound except by natural means or by chance, with a needle, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn>
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of cartilage in the wound.</start_of_turn>
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Cartilage is seen to be tough over the wound and forbids the dressing from being placed. It must remain on the wound for several days.</start_of_turn
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the cartilage in which the wound is tough and is not another disease of cartilage, then collect that cartilage.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to suspend his head in the belly, and immediately suspend those veins with one or two nails according to your prudence; and that nail be of doubled substance according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so two nails gradually in a circle according to this form:</start_of_turn
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then gather those veins with fine forceps, with skill, and remove the silk hour by hour until all those veins are finally closed and withdrawn.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Take care that you do not injure the edges of the wound. And if during the operation you see the sun, and if you are firm in your operation, do not insert anything except those veins.</start_of_turn
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you pour in the wound cold water or vinegar so that its acidity corrodes what is remaining of the cartilage.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	May it not be to your ability to collect all that time, and if you do not, then you plaster all with water that comes out of the wound, and read the wound for several days until the pain is gone and the bleeding is stopped.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat over it as many times as the maid manages until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:</start_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you have cured the arizati with cautery or acute medicine, if it is not healed according to the narration, do not be afraid of it, but make an incision over the maturity of the wound, and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is exposed.</start_of_turn
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and sometimes in its corruption or blackness, then you scratch it with a tool of this kind:</start_of_turn
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough cap, and make it with a knife, and round off the head as if you were making a point with a needle or with lime for a point (as it is in the following form).</start_of_turn
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And rest it over the corrupt part of the bone, and gradually rotate that between the thighs mentioned, and press your hand little by little until you see that that corruption is gone.</start_of_turn
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if there is any blood, and when the wound has recovered, restore the limb with desiccant and astringent substances.</start_of_turn
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the limb is consolidated and the new cartilage has been born, and if the limb has been separated from the belly for forty days, and it is not renewed and is not swollen and no accident has happened in it, then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then it is not in their engineering but in reducing the fissure to the shape of a nose, and in this manner: that you uncover the bones following the fashion of a sharp knife or acute medicine, and as if you had uncovered the bones, then you take three stripes according to this fashion:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Then the three stripes are of the triangular form, and the head of the bone is first extended into the limb as sometimes happens with them.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then rest that over the bone, and that from the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little further, and then draw your hand over the stripes until you have penetrated all the bones, and he will feel the pain as though he had found wind to loosen it when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore restore the limb with astringent medicines by drying them out in this way as if you had taken them away
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh and the limb are hardened, then the matter which was exuding to the parts returns to the nose, therefore it is more curious about the pain.
Capitol .xx.	End of Document.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Note: The document ends abruptly without completing the translation of the last sentence.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the limb swells completely and does not yield in the night or diminish, then it is necessary to loosen the pain, and immediately take away the cause of the pain; and also stop any breezes from the neck downwards. Place on the limb a liniment which is made of acacia and aloe and beeswax and gum Arabic, and strengthen the dressing over the limb with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powder is that you take lion's mane cloth and each fold is doubled four times; and make of those folds.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And rest those over each other according to the quantity of which the limb has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen over those with a firm and strong structure; and repeat the breezes with care, and keep the limb still during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Even if the ligament is softened, it is necessary that it be kept straight
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And keep the ligament still both day and night as we have said
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the limb has already shrunk, that is good, and if not, then repeat the dressing with the powder and the structure and the breezes until it is healed
Capitol .xxi.	End of Document.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Note: The document ends abruptly without completing the translation of the last sentence
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the outer tunic of the eye, and it is eminent and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of sand, and is of the shape of a man, and you wish to pierce it, then the operation in this case is as follows: enter the needle at the root of the eyebrow from the outside of the eye towards the inside, and then put the needle back in the place where the double fold is, and make that penetrate and take out the first needle according to its position; and then pierce the limb of the double fold and bring with it the part of the eyebrow which is around the needle, and strengthen that hold
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and rest over the swollen eye with infused albumin and remove the thread from the eye when it has healed.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of the eye so that it is comfortable when the wound has healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	When many veins gather together in a circle around the circumference of the eye and are of great prominence, and they are pierced with a fine needle which comes from the preorbital space, and the watery humor is discharged, and the eye is lowered and enters immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen until it is healed
Capitol .xxii.	End of Document
De curacio de alconati.	Note: The document ends abruptly without completing the translation of the last sentence
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconati is nothing but a wound which is adjusted in the eye resembling rainwater falling and is not that one.</end_of_turn>
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work on this is to make the pain lie over the spot that appears swollen and taut, and take hold of the upper eyelid with your thumbs of both hands and that one which is inside until you see the wound healing in the lower part, and do not let it go down, and keep the eye open, for the pain sees its causes in this way.</end_of_turn
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, you know that it is water.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it is not prepared for the descent of the wound with water as we have said, then make the pain lie between your thumbs and take a pointed cautery and burn over that part of the eyeball where the conjunctiva meets the cornea at the crown (in the place where the old wound was), until the wound is expelled.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is outside of the ordinary, you distill into the cold water a mixture of honey or water in which you have boiled rue and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And thus treat with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the care of water descends from the scent.</end_of_turn>
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said concerning the species of water in the division and what is to be performed, that is to declare according to the state of health.</end_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Therefore keep the patient between your hands over the heel of his foot and hold his hand firmly.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And thus place your left hand over the heel of the foot if the water is cold, or your right hand if it is hot.</end_of_turn
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And thus take hold of the mixture with your right hand if it is cold, or with your left hand if it is hot.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And thus withdraw the extremity of the mixture near the margin of the eye for the thickness of the hair on the brow, and mix the mixture with oil and stir with your hand.</end_of_turn
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And thus penetrate into the eye and sit down so that the mixture has already reached its purpose by reason of its heat.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Therefore measure the length of the mixture up to the pupil, which is the margin of the eye; and this is the circumference of the eye. See that this is visible through the pupil with the vision of the eye for the clarity of the cornea.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And thus withdraw the mixture into the place where the water is, and then draw up a little more from below, so that if the water has descended too much, the patient will see better when he looks at the object which was causing his vision to be blurred, and the mixture in the eye.</end_of_turn
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And thus rest for a little while; so if the water has descended, withdraw that other little bit so that there is no excess of mixture left in the eye.</end_of_turn
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus when it is quiet and does not descend, withdraw the mixture easily and gently, and mix with your hand a little of clear salt of gemma and rub in that way; and then wash the eye with lukewarm water, and wipe away any mucus with a cloth or bandage infused with oil of roses and vinegar, and mix with the water the remnants of the mixture.</end_of_turn
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May God keep us from those who are of our time and let us rest over that which is nourishing to the eye.</end_of_turn
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your eye with the mixture during its application — for some men whose eyes are naturally hard are like this — then know that you must take the sponge which is called the alberid and which is the form of this:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore pierce at that conjunctiva and do not touch your hand to the wound, and do not do anything else if the joint is not freed from the mixture.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And thus apply the mixture as we have said.</end_of_turn
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must praise God for your work, whether he prepared the patient for the disease by descending in the place where he sleeps in a dark room, and prohibited from all movement.</end_of_turn
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest in the nature of water so that its nature is calmed, and do not move the patient from one side to the other or from side to side at all.</end_of_turn
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And keep the bandage on according to its order for the third day.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And thus remove that from the dark room when the cold has passed and restore the sight, and make some inquiries, and return the bandage within seven days.</end_of_turn
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not mix water in the hour of treatment or at any other time.</end_of_turn
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Know that you must keep water away from the eye so that it does not irritate it excessively and with great violence.</end>
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if the eye becomes inflamed after the cautery, know that you must remove the mixture at the end of the seventh day, and rectify with water that does not irritate.</end>
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	You have completed the vision of the eye and rested on the face of the patient for the reason that it is ruled by the times of the day. Leave it for a while in the dark room.</end>
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in no way is the disciple of vision excused for any vision that has been seen, and when you are sure about the operation.</end_of_turn>
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already come to our attention that some of those who are learned in the Art of Healing say that there is fire in the great artery that is perforated by the passage of urine.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	More than that, we have not seen or heard in our land anything like it, neither have we read of anything like it among the free men of the ancient times; and it is possible that it is new.</end_of_turn
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the spices of madness so that he may be over those who do not know those.</end_of_turn
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are either fat or lean, or both properly, and their extremities are like this triangular subtlety, the extremity being acute as that which is the shape.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXV.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Concerning the care of the flesh there is nothing new under the sun.</end_of_turn
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various meats born in the body, each of which is the cause of some ailment, it is like a scorpion's tail or a multitude of worms; and this disease is called polypo which is similar to that foot.</end_of_turn
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is like gangrenous flesh, ulcerated, yellow-brown; and it is like the flesh of a lion not of brown colour.</end_of_turn
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that lion flesh there is neither fraudulence nor gangrene, cover that when you see that the patient's pain is between your hands, put him in the sun, loosen the nails and prick his belly once in those meats.</end_of_turn
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract that to the outer parts, and indeed remove what you have understood from those by that sharp and subtle point of the thumb when you know that all the flesh is already wasted; for if there remains any cause of the disease from which the excision is possible, when you have recognized it, do so with one of the subtle instruments so that there remains no further cause.</end_of_turn
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Moreover, if the sovereign orders it with sanctity or acidity post-partum, when you know that there is danger; or if it is malignant post-partum, then you should cover it and cauterize that which must be excised so that it is cleanly excised and the cavities are completely healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And indeed take in the body the vinegar or wine vinegar and water or wine.</end_of_turn
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Moreover, if the body is opened and there is moisture proceeding from the palate, know that it is already healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Moreover, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that the flesh in those wounds is nothing to the bones of the nails to which it does not reach the excision.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, know that you must enter with fidelity to that to which any greatness belongs, and do not touch anything except the nails, and stay between each nail the quantity of the thumb or less, and soothe the patient and expel one part of the disease from the nails at the root or for another cause that makes it possible.</end_of_turn
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that is done, that is to say when the stench has passed and the wound has reached the nail canals, then take away the greasy ointment that was put on, because that which is seen in the children at school in the actions of the women is a light cause of this.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then take away the two extremities of the thumb, one that goes out over the face and the other that remains in the face, and give warmth to the nails which are in the thumb, and do this until you know that the flesh is already on the nails of the thumb.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the thumb, and leave in the face the stripping of the sanctity a distance of a gauze, and do this for three days or more until the bruised tissue is completely healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, when the cause is over, leave in the face a plum catheter for a few days until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Moreover, if you take care of the care that has been given, use of that.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument which is used to capture the ointment that is distilled from oils and medicines in the nails.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	It is made of silver or lead, which is like a small lamp whose wick is like a little cone, and the body is like a tube.</end_of_turn
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make a closed incision like this one, with a canula whose tip is blunt and flat, uncovered; to which you must hold on the back of the limb, to which you must apply whatever oil or liquid you wish from the patient's exudates and causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	The blunt part of the canula is precious: recipe of castor oil, white bayberry, ginger, saffron peel, long pepper, mastic of chamomile, and asafoetida.</end_of_turn> I come with blood and bile, and make fat pills, and a pill is to be dissolved in lukewarm water, and be given to the patient on the abdomen just as soon as possible.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-five.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From their tails in the extremities of the nose.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The spotted [disease] is the one that comes from the extremities of the nose, and is magnified and recognized in four days within which it is not seen to regress from it.</end_of_turn
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that you must order that one should abstain from food from the beginning of the appearance of the disease, and eradicate all that.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And place your hand over the area or cautery or medicine that is in the area.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the disease is delayed before it is magnified, however, consider if it is soft, tough, of a yellowish color and with little sensation; do not touch that which is a herpes craniorum; for spotted [disease] comes from that which is incites this herpes over that which has it.</end_of_turn
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the herpes is of a golden yellow color and not of black, and sometimes when the disease begins, it is possible in all of them; then evacuate the patient from the disease and order that one should drink water and exercise until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-six.</end_of_turn>
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by humidity.</end_of_turn
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	So when the continuity happens in one of these cartilages, little confidence is had in that operation except in a few persons.</end_of_turn
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it is due to some cause of these, consider if it is fresh plague with the hair intact, and when you have adjusted the two lips of the plague with a suture, then care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the continuity have already separated, and some part is healthy, care that you excise some part of the visible wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips with the suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle clean salt, and cover with a piece of fine plaster, or with some other consolidating plaster, and leave it on for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another, and leave it on until the wound is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of the suture is that you add the continuity of the wound or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the continuity with thread as you wish and tell us.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-seven.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of that which causes the swelling in the two lips in the parts of the wound.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Spotted [disease] must be in some persons in the parts of the wound of their lips, some small and some large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must convert the lips and wounds some of those hard parts throughout, and cover the abscesses with a dressing of clean salt until the wound is tightened, and wash with vinegar and cure the area with an astringent until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-eight.</end_of_turn
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the insertion of the staple adjusted in the gums.</end_of_turn
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great swelling does not arise over the gum on which the staple is adjusted which they formerly called albulus, where you must suspend it with one hand or hold it with the forceps and insert it where you must; and when you have inserted it, let the blood run or drain.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place over the area clean salt or another adhesive or exsicative powder.</end_of_turn
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that thick liquid returns, then immediately cut away that part, and cauterize it so that it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	If that thick liquid returns, then immediately cut away that part, and cauterize it so that it will not return.</end_of_turn>
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Because of the teeth and the iron.</end_of_turn
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the front teeth and of the molars and between the gums there are adjusted sharp scales, leaves, and some veins that are black and are causing damage to the gum, because of that corruption is made of the teeth that are left.</end_of_turn
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you must remove the disease between your thighs and suspend the head of the patient in the belly so, and scrape the teeth in which those scales appear and cause the sand to remain so that no other cause remains, and that the blackness and the yellowness and the rest that make it black.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if it is at the beginning of the disease, it is not good; and if so, immediately repeat the remedy for three days until it disappears from its root cause.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth have needed various movements and figures depending on how it is prepared for your operation.</end_of_turn>
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razor that is used for the part of the tooth that is outside is different from the razor that is used between the teeth according to other figures, and these figures of shaving must be prepared by you as you will see.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.</end_of_turn
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Eradication of Teeth.</end_of_turn>
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Therefore when you cure the tooth of its pain by all means and perform the total eradication of it, there is no cause that replaces the root of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublimated substance that is excused in the eradication of it.</end_of_turn
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be known when the disease is forceful that this tooth must be eradicated, and you must firmly confirm that this is the painful tooth, because many roots deceive the disease and cause that there is still pain even after the operation of the barbers.</end_of_turn
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore you must be certified that this is the painful tooth, and that you know well, that when you make an incision around the tooth with a spatula in the area where there is any vein, until the tooth is completely separated from the gum of all parts, and then remove the part with the pliers, or with fine forceps from the beginning gradually until it is completely gone.</end_of_turn
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And almost always in these forces one must hold great care for good speech or stupid fear, and suspend the head of the patient between the two painful teeth that you must not touch, and gently remove the tooth following the rule without breaking that, or without causing greater pain.</end_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	Therefore if it is not forgotten, immediately take one of those instruments and put it aside from all parts with ease and strive to remove it as soon as possible so that it is done at the beginning.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is cracked or decayed, then you must fix that crack and strengthen that part with a fine file so that it is not broken during the constriction of that area.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Therefore you must work cautiously with a scarification around the entire circumference of the gum and maintain your strength that you do not break that, and remain there until the pain is completely gone.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And keep in mind that the ignorant barbers do many things that are harmful in their eagerness to eradicate teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many roots cause greater suffering in the patients than they eliminate, or that the remaining roots remain all together, or some of them, or that they extract that which should be left in the jaw as many roots as have been testified.</end_of_turn
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of them let the mouth be washed with wine vinegar or wine with salt.</end_of_turn
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows from the wound to help, as is often the case, then immediately wipe away any amount of blood and sprinkle powder on the wound, and if you do not confirm that powder, cauterize.</end_of_turn
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the pliers and fine tweezers with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning is long extended, short handle and wide, so that they do not bend when working.</end_of_turn
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they are thus also as when the handle is large until you have practiced with them so that they are not bent, they are short extended.</end_of_turn
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital CXXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Extraction of teeth and loosening of the teeth roots of the lower jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must eradicate teeth which are tormented by any cause, then cover the area around the tooth with a sponge for a day or two until the pain subsides; and then apply an ointment or plaster to the extracted teeth which are assembled like a heron's beak called ciconia or guanta, in the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extracted teeth are painful just like lime or barley
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey me with these forceps or plaster, then cover the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called atali, which is a small lever of this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let the large bone be extracted with a slight touch, and do not be hasty so that it is not fractured
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is split, it is bad; and if not, help me with other instruments of which these are the forms: the first instrument has a triangular extraction with any thickness
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument has a triangular shape and a narrower extraction
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already with this instrument having two slopes of which this is the shape again:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which I will enumerate in the shaving of teeth; for help is given by this instrument which is assembled like a great one, and this is the shape
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extraction flat or short, which is any thickness, and do not be hasty so that it is not fractured.<end_turn>
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other precautions that the teeth must follow are like the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artisans be wise and skillful in the art, for he finds for himself the means for himself according to what he understands of the operation and the various diseases; for these are the diseases for which the ancients did not say or even know of their own instruments, for the forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth be fractured or loosened, or if you should fear, be sure to cure the wound quickly over that part with the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help me with the management of which this is the shape
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be small in any size, small or large, and be bound or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or run away until the whole bone is split; and then restore the wound with appropriate medicines at your convenience
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if in the bone is little, then reduce that of that reduction and of its blackness, and care for that until it is healed
Capitol .xxxii.	Capital CXXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of the teeth prominent over the others
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course for those of the shape of a blade, and more when they tend to the ankles, and more to the beloved toes; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is nothing to another tooth, and it is not possible to shave or ligate it, then leave it alone; but if it is not annexed to another tooth, then you must use this instrument which is like a claw of a crab, and which is made of Indian iron of extracted height
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And its incision must be made with the one which you have indicated for several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not like that of other teeth
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to attrition, then grind that with a file of Indian iron of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let all be of Indian iron, the mark exactly as before; and be of such small points as needles, with which the tooth is polished little by little in several days with ease, so that it is not like another tooth that breaks.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line it up again at the end, and reduce that at the edges of the wound
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If it is from the side from which a part is torn and bleeds the tongue, then you must limit that part which you expect to be excised so that the aspired part is held back and included, and filled up so that neither the tongue bleeds nor the word is distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of teeth made of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the front teeth with concussion and displacement by percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot tolerate what he/she eats, and you have cured him/her with topical medications, and it has not been of any use, then it is necessary that you make gold for them, for gold does not become green and does not become poor like silver which becomes green in a few days, even though it is not changed forever
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the gold must be made in such softness and swelling according to the quantity that it must enter between the teeth; and the way to make the restoration is that you take the gold and double it between two healthy teeth, and that you make it grow between two curved surfaces of the gold between two mauled teeth, or if one or two, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth of the other side
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat the process until you reach the part from which you started, and hold your hand firmly and carefully until it is not bloody.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the strip of gold that you hold must be over the roots of the teeth that you do not remove
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And cut away the excess of gold with forceps or tweezers, and add those to the body, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the mauled tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And thus let it rest as the Romans did
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is slipped or bulges, hold that or those to the other gold in such a way that it will always be firm
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two mauled teeth, like these which are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or two back to their place, close the wounds at the same time, and let them recede as we have recommended, and that they heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do nothing but a good craftsman and a wise man
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And many herbs are suitable for any cause of the bones of cows, and it is useful for them as teeth, and is placed in the place where the tooth is defective, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prevents speaking
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is found behind the tongue has some herbs or is natural from which people do not know, or it is accidental and is caused by a wound which has already consolidated
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you burn the mouth of the patient, cut off any existing hair in the belly; and elevate the tongue, and then cut that ligament and nerves according to the width until the tongue is freed from its retraction
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or discoloration, and what has happened is for the consolidation of the wound, then you must wait a little and cut that for the width until you have cut through the ligament and the discoloration has disappeared
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there is no useless fissure in the heel of the limb and that you cut here and there and bring out the clot.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And finally wash away the remnants of the incision with vinegar or wine or with wet gauze; and then leave the tongue free; so is the one which has the patient leave the tongue in any night so that it is not consolidated by another herb.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is flux of blood, leave over the wounded part for a while; but if the blood boils, then cauterize the place with a pointed cautery which you should keep moist with water
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And thus care for the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some external factors cause the tongue to swell, resembling a small nail, prohibiting its natural operation; and this greatly increases until the mouth is empty.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation for this is that you open the patient's mouth and expose the swelling before the sun, and consider the swelling
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see any black or dark spots, rough to the touch, which the patient does not feel, do not touch that which is cranky
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is pale, which is humid, put on your thumb and make a small incision, and cut away all the surrounding tissue; and if you smell something during the operation, stop immediately, for it is a sign of old blood, until it is withdrawn
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed and rinsed with vinegar and salt; and care for the other care of the patient until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of swelling from the two ankles and that which is in the groin and the other swellings.</start_of_turn>
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the swelling is in the groin, these are glands which are joined together and which are often soothed outwards, and are not two ankles; when you treat them with water as we have said in the division and they are not healed, then you must consider if the swelling is hard, dark in color, without feeling, for do not touch that which is painful.</start_of_turn
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is black in color and the reason is large, do not touch that which is painful for the blood; remove that which is inside as soon as possible, or if you will break it yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is pale, which is humid, put on your thumb and make a small incision.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation for this is that you consider, before you begin your operation, if the swelling has already subsided naturally or if it has diminished somewhat; and when you have opened the mouth, put the patient's head down, and open the patient's mouth, and your servant will take between their hands the patient's tongue, leaving it outside the instrument. This is the way:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It is done with silver or gold, and is subtle as a coat of paint.</start_of_turn
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore when you have promised that to the patient and he has shown you the swelling, and you have put your hand on that part several times, then take your thumb and stay there, and pull away everything outwards as much as you can.</start_of_turn
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And concerning any other cause of the swelling, and when you have made the incision with this instrument which is like this:</start_of_turn
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled like forceps, however the extremities are curved, so that the orifice of each of them is in the end of the other, not pointed, which is iron that it is not blunt.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Even if this instrument is not available, you can make an incision like this: and it is sharp at one end, not at the other.</start_of_turn
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having made an incision, make the other according to this manner of incision, and then hold the incision so that the patient does not suffer from excessive bleeding.</start_of_turn
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is bleeding, keep it moistened with decoction of poppyseed or mugwort leaves until the bleeding is stopped, and care for that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And many women suffer from swelling in the groin, other swelling in the two ankles, and these you must incision according to what we have said about the incision of two holes which touch each other.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I myself have treated a woman who had swelling in the groin which was black in color, without feeling, which already closed the groin of her, and the woman was gasping for breath, and I had already forbade her from eating and drinking water, and she was on the verge of death if it had not been for the fact that I remained with her for a day or two.</start_of_turn>
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the swelling had already become so large that there were two ramps under it when I came to take it out for two fingers.</start_of_turn
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I held it tightly and put my thumb on it, and pulled out that which was big, and I put my hand over the other one, and I opened the mouth and compressed the tongue, and I held the thumb over the swelling.</start_of_turn
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then immediately evacuate a great extent, and do not delay except for a small amount of safety.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore it is absolutely necessary for her to urinate frequently, and begin to drink water immediately, and do not stop eating, so that I do not cease to prescribe this purgative for a long time, and afterwards will prescribe another instead of this, which will be effective as soon as the other has ceased.</end_of_turn>
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I order you to go quickly and cauterize her genitals, so that there is no addition; and immediately I will go and walk, and I do not fear that God will be angry with me for this.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the beginning of fever when it is prescribed.</end_of_turn>
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr descends to the belly, and it is prescribed and is long, then it is not named perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part round and big, then it is called buba.</end_of_turn
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	More when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and do not grieve your cure, and immediately know that the fever has ceased when the purges have already ceased and are subtle; then know that you must prescribe something else round; and if it is of that length, and is bloody, of a reddish or blackish color, and is not centennial, then know that you must fear the beginning of the disease, because in that there is fear of the patient.</end_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that again according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that your patient will be cured and praise your tongue as an instrument from which to process its form and thereby remains almost in the new, and throw away that one and prescribe another two.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	Know that you must not prescribe this unless it is adjusted according to the natural terms of addiction, because if you prescribe it more, you will make them sick.</end_of_turn
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, use the water which we have recommended in the beginning of two mellas, and cure that until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	More if the disease was frightened by the beginning of the disease, know that you must use wisdom in the cauterization of it because of your fear, and the manner of the cautery is nothing but acute water, and that you hold the head of the patient over the belly, and immediately praise the tongue as the instrument which we have said, and immediately take from the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and comfort with that cause life, and do not allow it to be thick or subtle, and from that fill the cavity of the instrument which is the shape of this.</end_of_turn
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	And the emission of the cavity in which the medicine is placed just like the cavity of a ray’s shell, and stop the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, the patient will lick over his lips so that he swallows or expels saliva or mucus from his mouth for the efficacy of the medicine, so that no bad thing remains from that concerning the belly of the patient and that it escapes from that.</end_of_turn
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And immediately take your hand with the medicine and press that onto the uvula for about a quarter of an hour until it is softened and calmed by the biting of the medicine.</end_of_turn
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a sponge and wrap that around the limb of the ray, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and put the ray into the sponge in a cannula so that the sponge adheres to that cannula, and do that for as long as you desire until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the thumb, and then immediately remove that so that it dries and falls off on its own within three or four days.</end_of_turn
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not desire that the medicine be repeated, repeat that one, and immediately after the cauterization remove the blistering in the circuit of the thumb by cutting around the edge, and modify that which is in the circuit of the medicine, and let it be washed with cold water, and let it be cured with ointment, and apply safeguards until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more safe than the beginning and more long in fear.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some scholars are cured of the thumb with water which is more subtle than cauterization and beginning, which is cured with subfumigation in this manner: prescribe calamine, rue, origanum, rosemary, pounded Arabic gum, chamomile, broth and similar to those herbs, and mix all these things together, or some of them, in a basin, and immerse them in vinegar; and let the vinegar be well stirred, and in the middle of the vinegar put a vessel containing a pointed instrument of iron according to this manner; let it be made of silver or iron.</end_of_turn
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the limb be introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the thumb over the canula, until the thumb is not opaque.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	E aprop itera over those veins which are seen to be engorged until they are dry, and keep that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack of gout, for it would be too tight in the gout, and would not cover that it is necessary, but you must declare the gout of them cautiously.</li>
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Even if this instrument is not present, take a tube and apply it to the outside of the limb and make a burn there, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the burn of the tube prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.</li
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.</li
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.</li
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the marrow and of the other causes.</li
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Engorged veins adhere in the marrow or heel bone or any other cause.</li<end_turn>
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore cover that you extract that which is apparent of those which are seen, over which you cast the gaze, because you press the tongue with the instrument that you are wielding, so that it is declared that it is in the marrow.</li><end_turn>
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the marrow, cover that you make the patient vomit the bad air before the food has been digested in the stomach, for it strengthens the underlying cause of the marrow if it is forced out by vomiting; or that he swallow the bad air with a gulp of wine or radish or a spoonful of bread; or give him to drink a spoonful of sea sponge soaked in oil, and bind that firmly with faith, and thus remove the bad air from him, for when the spines are pricked out in the place where they are extracted, it is forgotten.</li><end_turn
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it firmly to him, and give him faith in the bed and support his feet and legs; or take a horn and support his face and support his head.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if those causes have not been forgotten, then use a lead instrument in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small ray, and in the limb it should be concave in which you enter with your instrument to facilitate it.</li><end_turn
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And hold his head raised above his chest, and keep that you do not touch his chest or the heel with your hand, or that the surgeon puts his hand on it.</li><end_turn
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Therefore indeed that the bad air which enters is more, for his knowledge of the place of the underlying cause and incises in it, and pulls his hand away from the instrument from him, as much as is prepared for him until it is forced out.</li><end_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.</li><end_turn
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood clot which is annexed to the marrow.</li><end_turn
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood clot is medicated with those things which have been said in the division of the treatment with medicines and does not cause discomfort, consider that in the marrow of the patient towards the evening, because you have compressed his tongue with the instrument which you have recommended.</li><end_turn
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you sometimes see blood clot, extract that which is once small or slightly thick appropriately.</li><end_turn
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract that, take a concave needle and insert it into the marrow of the patient, and when you have reached the cavity of the needle, put a burning iron there, and do so until (until the blood clot is dead and is separated from the marrow) and restrain him for the whole day.</li><end_turn
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And give him to drink a bowl of cold water, and open his mouth with that, and wash his mouth with that; and do not give him anything from that cause and keep the water there for an hour or so with his hand, for the blood clot has as much strength as the water which is there.</li><end_turn
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Therefore if it is not forced out by the water which we have recommended, keep the patient suffocated with the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.</li><end_turn
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do so, so that it falls.</li><end_turn
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another manner of operation in the fumigation of that is that you take a bowl in which are burning charcoal and cover it with a cover in the middle of which is a tube, and put the extremity of the instrument in that tube; and when you have kindled the charcoal, extinguish the smoke; and place the patient’s mouth over the extremity of the needle, and close his mouth so that the smoke is not forced out until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood clot, for the blood clot will then fall down.</li><end_turn<end_turn>
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If he does not vomit, repeat the fumigation with vinegar, abstain from nourishing the patient, eat coarse foods and other herbs, do not drink water, and if necessary, do so outside the house.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument with which the evacuation of blood is treated from the groin when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps in this way, but sometimes it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed over the groin, and its extremity is similar to the beak of a heron, which is hooked, in which it is grasped from five, so that when pressure is applied to any cause, that which does not yield
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.</start_of_turn>
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the word concerning the appearance of boils and the section of their treatment.</start_of_turn>
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Boils are of various kinds, of various shapes, as it is remembered from some part of this book.</start_of_turn
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in puncture and section for two reasons, of which the one is for the kind of boils themselves; and for what they contain of humors.</start_of_turn
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second reason is that in the parts of the body where the boil has occurred, for example, a boil that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs on the buttocks; and a boil that occurs on a fleshy part is different from one that occurs in a joint; and each one of them must be treated according to its operation.</start_of_turn
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some boils that must not be pierced except at the appropriate time of the disease in those or with their support.</start_of_turn
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other boils must be cauterized when they are crossed, and are not matured according to their support, as well as boils that are close to joints, for a boil that is close to a joint, if it is prolonged, will corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, because it is a harmful cause of contraction of that limb; or if it is a boil close to a main member, and if you delay the perforation of it when it is mature, it does not benefit the main member; or if it is close to the buttocks, therefore perforate it when it is not mature; and do not perforate cruelly, without proper digestion, but only that which is close to the buttocks, so that you do not weaken the loin of the buttocks, and that there is a fistula, or that it is healed in its entirety that it is not healthy.</start_of_turn
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is better that you know the time of the perforation of the boil, and that is when it is mature.</start_of_turn
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is mature when the pain and fever cease, and the diminishing of swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the boil, and the other signs.</start_of_turn
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the perforation must be performed in the place furthest from the boil and where the pus comes out from the care of the eminence.</start_of_turn
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The perforation must always be made either along the bone or along the limb, if the boils are in the parts of the head or the feet, and in the places of the lacerations, of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally, in all the places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use the perforation according to that limb.</start_of_turn
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the boil is close to a fleshy part, it is better that you wait for the digestion of it to be confirmed before perforating it, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, you prolong the suffering of the limb and its swelling, and you harden the edges of the boil and its depth.</start_of_turn
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some boils must be perforated according to the breadth of the bone or limb if necessary, or according to what the limb itself demands.</start_of_turn
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small perforation, in the large boils a great perforation and wide or many small sections according to the diversity of the size of the boils.</start_of_turn
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are those boils in which it is necessary that the corden be concave and inflamed, when it is already in its entirety that it should remain, as well as that which occurs in the tropics of dust and boils.</start_of_turn
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with incision having three angles; and of those that are incised like the figure of a mulberry leaf, like the boils of the gonads.</start_of_turn
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those there are those in which round incision and lunar incision are administered, and they resemble the latter.</start_of_turn
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May he who is unable to bear even superficial wounds as after post-leptomes cover that wound, or flatten it as much as possible.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	If the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, perforate it immediately and do not hesitate to remove all the pus at that time; having extracted a part, then immediately instill another portion of the abscess back into the other day, and extract a greater portion the next day, and so on until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Moreover, if the disease is of cold origin, or is in a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man in decrepitude, when the animal spirit of the disease is resolved by the evacuation of pus, and when the disease is greatly diminished, you should perform the operation
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this chapter and take great care when perforating these abscesses, because you must remove the filth and consider whether the abscess is small and flat, or whether you should administer some external or internal antiseptics; and if the abscess is large and the puncture wounds are numerous, cover that you place a mechanical barrier in any movement until the swelling subsides
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If part of the kidney has burst in the abscess or if you have softened that in the circuit, cover that you bind that part with old cloth or with thread like thread, just as when you draw threads or bones, when there is moisture; and keep it closed for the third day; and when it is finished, care for the wound as to prevent infection until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Moreover, if blood flows out during your operation, administer cold water and vinegar in the place where a thread of silk has been drawn out, and stop that over the area of the blood flow until the bleeding has ceased
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Moreover, if bleeding persists, cover that you administer regimen and care as I have recommended in many places of this book and in our division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	Moreover, if it is winter and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, cover that you sprinkle pepper in wine and oil, and put those on the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if it is summer and the places are fleshy, cover that you sprinkle powder with eggs in water and oil or in wine and oil, and keep that until the third day, as we have said, and when the abscess is removed, remove that and administer the treatment that is appropriate for it until it is healed
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary to have knowledge of the treatment of abscesses throughout, however, according to the way of distinguishing which has already been said concerning every abscess, in what manner it is treated by chapters individually
Capitol .xli.	Chapter LXI.</start_of_turn>
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of abscesses which occur in the kidney of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the small kidney of the head there are small abscesses, and of the kind which contain tunics which make them; and the size of them is great
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from these there are drops, and those which contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those which contain moisture similar to urine, and resembling stones; and from those which are like pebbles, hard
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision of all these, and in the extraction of those, fear not, as the extension of those does not make the wound harmful.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation of incision of these is that you express them with an instrument of the kind which you see me bring, which is called an entrometrum, until you see that it contains what you think
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what is contained is moisture, then cut that according to the length by superficial incision as follows:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the incision of the line of B to the line of G. When the moisture is evacuated, then you will extract that by which that moisture is contained, and do not leave any cause of that, for troops that are left over will return, if there remains any cause of that
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And immediately immerse the wound in Egyptian unguents, if there is any, or in water and salt; and fill that with the wound and leave that until tomorrow, for that which is left over will decay all that remains of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat over that wound with Egyptian unguents according to what is indicated and until you are confident that no cause of that membrane remains; then care for the wound with that ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then cut that as follows
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I am sectioned, having no form of cross, and grasp nails between two lips of the section and run away from all parts, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it be that your incision makes the matter worse, but I will tell you first of all
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And thus we do in the softened abscess of the section and care; as you have heard; and the section over the softened abscess is lighter, which is less painful and has less humidity
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And many veins are like these abscesses which are in the head of the homes among whom there is no humidity; which cause that we do not see an abscess in the head of an old woman even though we press on it like a deaf, rough, white stone, which cannot be drunk, and if there is any at all in that which we press, it swells that
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that happen in the head, this is not the head, just as abscesses that happen at the heads of children and must be due to the roots of the nails, although the section of these is superficial
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body of the pain is relieved from the lower parts
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And take care of those with what is necessary for care.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 52.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of carbuncles that happen in the groin.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The veins that flow through these abscesses go through the groin and the buttocks and the flanks; and some veins happen in the other parts of the body
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the groin, and those that are generated between them, and all carbuncles of these are devoid of their own tunic, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have said
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these carbuncles are veins, which are some of them soft, and those that contain humidity, and those that are malignant which do not obey care
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, when you sometimes have good intention in the touch, of which the color of the liquid which appears is appropriate for the color of cod liver, and is very black throughout, and is not connected with the nerves of the groin, or with the veins, or with the incision, and is not a wound, as you can see in the case of the abscesses of the head, scrape away everything from the surface of the part down to the part beyond the body of the line of G within the line of B, and scrape away everything throughout, and pull out two lips of the cod liver with nails, or with teeth if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And take more care not to puncture the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the sponge not be too acute, that it does not fit your hand on the incision, or that it irritates the patient, and that you do not irritate anything that is not necessary to irritate; for if you irritate the vein or the incision, you will prevent your operation, for when you have a wound of the vein or the incision and you prohibit the flow of blood, the hour you pause the bleeding, and open the wound, leave that which is within until the acute pain of the abscess has passed and the wound has become softened and the wound has become somewhat fluid
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drained out
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And ask if there is any other small carbuncle, so irritate those and wash those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover that hour that you do not irritate that carbuncle from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Go away and cover that like a faithful dog, and leave that within until it falls by itself spontaneously.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian unguent, and take care of that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you irritate that carbuncle throughout, the hour cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and keep them together so that no excess remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if there is sometimes excess of liquid due to the greatness of the carbuncle, cover that you understand how to puncture the root of that, and remove that and administer suture and what is said
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And as for the carbuncles that contain humidity, pierce that with a superficial perforation here where you see its maturity, and pause the perforation of that which is below the body, as we have said
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when the plague has already subsided, then care for that which is warm from the generated flesh until it is healed
Capitol .xliii.	(The text ends abruptly here, indicating the end of the treatise.)
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the excision of the pillar of the apostem, the apostematist does not give him the poullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	I say that this excision in the heel has never been seen in our land that anyone has ever done
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those [doctors].
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in the houses they do not suffer from incontinence, cover that the extraction of the heel is avoided, as it is not useful for the healing of all the veins and the greater part of the disease is here
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have apostemas caused in the mouth or the heel or two nails, when the disease is not in the bone, cover to use the excision of the heel to escape the loss which is useful for perforation
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want that it should be done, let them inscribe the heel leaving three circles of the circles of the heel, or four at most for the width in that which is between two circles in quantity, that the incision be in cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for incision, as it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of life are found there
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is weak, cover that he extends the tendon of the heel with oil, and then make the incision of the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of life if you see any of those for any reason
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then make the incision little by little as we have recommended; and it is signified about the incision of the canal for the flame which is of that which is in it is dissolved with oil which is of it.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is ripe in which the perforation is feared, add two layers of fat to the edge of the wound, and so only will remain the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And say Albucasis that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposure is nothing but that you see that some of these apostemas have already opined the heel of the disease, and the disease is avenged within death, and the cause of it is between them, and these go to incision the epiglottis so that the disease can breathe over the location of the wound for any breath, and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and therefore I command you to close the wound when it is healed, and care for that until it is healed
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for my part is that a servant brought a bowl and put it in the heel of the patient and incised it in that place a part of the bone of the thumb, and I was called to the care of it, and I covered the blood with oil like it is done from the dead, and I uncovered the wound and covered the wound with silk which was sitting in the wound little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I confessed that no vessel or nerve had been injured, and that the blood had flown out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not reproach the servant if she did not recover her voice, and I told her that she should return to her duties
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the incision of the heel
Capitol .xliv.	(The text ends abruptly here, indicating the end of the treatise.)
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	From the incision about the apostemas which happen outside the heel, and is called hernia of the heel.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema which is called hernia of the heel is great according to the color of the limb, and is not in the women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, that is, either natural or accidental
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one it is not a matter of cure
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, one of which is like grass knots, and the other manner is like a apostem which is caused by the knotting of an artery, and in that one there is fear
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not presume with them as with iron, but only in the one who is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thus you inquire that which is similar to knots of fat, and if you find it resembling fatty nodes and not suspended from any vein, then you must pierce it as with the nodes, and extract that which is contained within the skin and fat; and if not, then it is prescribed to do all that is necessary, and take care of the area with that which covers the cure until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_turn>
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the fatty nodes.</end_turn>
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes there are two kinds, and I have already said all their kinds in the division.</end_turn
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I command that you take notice of the difference between a node and an extrusion, as it makes doubt.</end_turn
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an extrusion is a heat, fever, and severe pain until the excess of the fluid is sedated; and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.</end_turn
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A node is neither heat nor fever nor pain, but contains that oily liquid which is in its belly or sac.</end_turn
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and they commence like cheese and are effective just as wax, whether large or small, and they are of two kinds, those that are fatty and contain moisture, and those that are dry, as I said in the division.</end_turn
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a node, that you expel that and inquire about that at the commencement when the surrounding discomfort is called inward, as it will appear in the chapter that follows.</end_turn
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way to inquire of boils and of all nodes, that you grasp this discomfort and expel that which you find in the most humid place of the boil, and you will remove the strings that say that the discomfort has already penetrated the cord.</end_turn
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally put your hand according to the measure of the size of the boil, and then extract the inwardness and consider what remains of it.</end_turn
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture, whatever its color, has been expelled, then you must pierce it on the surface according to what I have said in other boils.</end_turn
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture remaining from the inwardness, then you know that it is fat.</end_turn
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over it in the manner of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	thus as I have taught you, and suspend that which is sticky, and remove the cord from all around easily, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the marrow from the node.</end_turn
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that marrow, and many veins are seen to be filled with blood, and you must extract it piecemeal until no cause remains.</end_turn
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the node returns as before.</end_turn
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you sometimes find that some small part remains, then complete the wound with several corrosive powders and strengthen the dressing, and stop over that which is the cause of the boil, and care for the other treatment until it is healed.</end_turn
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, then you must support its lips and care for that which surrounds it.</end_turn
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating vein is on the contrary, or non-pulsating, then you must cover it and fill the area with wool that is rough and coarse, and cover that with a strap for two days or three until the wound has healed and the fever has subsided; and then you can return to extracting what remains of the node.</end_turn
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.</end_turn
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the discomforts necessary in the section and perforation.</end_turn
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those there are three forms of inwardness, which are great, medium, and small.</end_turn
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The great form of inwardness is like this:</end_turn
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The medium form of inwardness is like this:</end_turn
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small form of inwardness is like this:</end_turn
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Use iron, saffron, fallen extremities appropriately, so that you can fix the instruments in the boils.</end_turn
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experts, and they are named albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, of which one is great, middle, and small
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The great expert's form:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The middle expert's form
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The small expert's form
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I believe that these are for those who have apostemas and exits and fistulas and abscesses so that between these there are bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And so round, gross, lions, horses, just like great needles with which the threads are sewn, and these are made of citrus, or of gold, or of iron, or of silver, and the miles are when they are made of citrus
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black plum seeds, which remember that for these are opened the fistulas in the cavity from which reflections are reflected, which are reflected back from their elevation to those reflections
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds, of which some are long, and of the others middle, and of the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The great expert's form of plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The middle expert's form of plum
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small expert's form of plum
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of nails are of three kinds, of which some are simple, which have only a curve, and three kinds: great, small and middle.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there are blunt nails, and three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails having two curves, and three kinds
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails having three curves, and three kinds
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a great simple nail, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a middle simple nail
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple nail, its form
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a blunt great nail
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a blunt middle nail
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a blunt small nail
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a great nail having two curves
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a middle nail having two curves
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small nail having two curves
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a great nail having three curves
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a middle nail having three curves
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small nail having three curves
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scorched, and there are three kinds, of which one is great, middle, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The great scapel form
Forma del scapel migier:	The middle scapel form
Forma de scapel pauc:	The small scapel form
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of these with which the incision is made are acute and the others are not acute, and they are not stopped in such a way, but that it may be useful in the excision of the nodes, the fear of injuring a vein or nerve, and for those that it may be healthy for the patient and bring tranquility when it finds relief of the discomfort from which the excision of the abscess is made
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of pills, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, just like beans
La forma de magda gran:	The great pill form
Forma de magda migier:	The middle pill form
Forma de magda pauc:	The small pill form
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of earth and are similar to rays with the which the alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is at the distant puncture with hidden sponge and in that which runs to the teeth and outwards, when you go, just like seeing them.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimis, which are hidden among the teeth of the thumbs, cause the perforation of the apostemas and are not perceived as ailments, and are of three species: great, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of winds that break the flow of blood, and are of three species; great, medium, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Are caused by yellow bile, round with any length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And that these species of winds cause your great, medium, and small ones to break the flow of blood quickly, and when this happens there is no longer any medicine for it.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to break blood in all parts of the body, and do not use them in fleshy places, such as in the cavities of the thighs and legs, and in the cavities of the chest, and in the nipples and belly and armpits, and keep them away from all fleshy wounds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And many other ointments are useful for these instruments and little things that resemble fish scales according to this form; for which blood is broken when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And many ointments are useful round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol xlvii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men which are composed of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some ointments swell the breasts of solitary men because of their sleep when they begin to become pale, and also swell the breasts, and gather the breasts of women, and keep them away from the apostemas, leaving them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who is tormented by this, cover that it be sectioned with a lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and immediately remove the whole thickness, and apply the plaster of an ointment that is appropriate, and adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for what is inside so that it is healed
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so if the breast slopes downwards towards the back and is softened by its size as it does with women, when it is split into two lateral cuts more than sufficient, according to a lunar incision, from the line B to the line G, of which each half is contained in the other one except for the end of each, until the greater line contains the smaller one according to this form of the line B and G. And immediately remove the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and keep the swelling down, and administer what has been said of the suture and the dressing that is necessary for the care until it is healed
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not comply with the incision of this which covers the incision due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then cover that you immerse the wound in corrosive ointment and leave that which is removed when the grease is consumed, and keep that which is inside until it is healed
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of apostemas which are caused from behind the nipples
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These apostemas which are caused from behind the nipples are of the species of scorpions, hard, which contain a sac that is like a bladder
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those which contain humidity; and those which contain humidity cover that they be sectioned with a lunar incision according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when everything is evacuated from the apostema of the urine, then immediately fill up the cavity and remove it the next day
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the cavity both empty and cured with convenient ointment until it is healed
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the apostema is of the species of knots, and of the scorpions, then cut through that as well as we have said in the section about the scorpions evenly
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended in such a way that it is almost imperceptible, then administer in it the cautery as we have mentioned above.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of apostemas which occur by means of an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the cord which is above that is solidified which is over that, then move the ointments that occur after the apostema. And it is known that these cause inflammation and apostema due to the artery or the vein: for when the apostema is due to an artery, it is long increased in the belly of the body; and that when you put in the apostema into the thighs, sitting in the places where there is a loud noise
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	He who is of the vein returns to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Except in this case, it is an error to leave the testicles, the veins, the armpits, the groin, and various parts of the body; for it is not great, therefore cover that their cure should be evaded, and that which is in the limbs or the head, that it should be avoided.</end_of_turn>
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that in whom for inflammation of the orifice of the artery, split in the codena section in the long; and immediately wipe the split with sponges and immediately apply the artery, and remove the tunicas until it is discovered.</end_of_turn
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And immediately put over that needle and make that penetrate through to the other side, and tighten the artery with a firm double knot in two places, — which causes your fainting in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.</end_of_turn
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And immediately put pressure on the place which is between two ligaments with a sponge until the blood clot has gone, and dissolve the swelling.</end_of_turn>
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately administer care in which is engendered poverty until the ligaments fall; and immediately care for that which is convenient at will until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a swelling from a broken vein, then cover that you have your hand over the swelling at the root of the swelling, and immediately insert the needle where you left your hand, and make that penetrate; and make a double fold in that place until you extract that which is from the other side, and immediately ligate the swelling with good ligament as I have said to you in the book of two parts of two limbs.</end_of_turn
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	More if you fear that you will extract the vein, then immediately insert the needle with that needle where all the swelling must be removed from the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the ties in four places.</end_of_turn
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And immediately dry the swelling in the middle of it until when it is sitting there, the hours you have incisions the superfluous of the codena, and leave what is bound to it.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately stop with the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and immediately administer the care which is useful with warmth and ointment until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter of the swelling that happens from the twisting of nerves.</end_of_turn>
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly as it happens with swelling in arteries and veins, and in the same way that swelling happens in nerves when it happens to them by percussion or from excessive work, and for the same reason.</end_of_turn
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is useful to know more in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where there are many joints.</end>
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a difficult swelling, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and is in the greatest of them when it is disposed of them and when it is stretched with violence, sitting in it the patient resembling a madman.</end_of_turn
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a swelling that occurs in the front of the body, and for so leave the codena, and it is more painful throughout and does not go to the front or back parts.</end_of_turn
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore of those who are in the joints do not cover that it should be enclosed with iron, because great force would be required to contract it.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More the one that is in the head or in the front of the head closes the codena with a sponge.</end_of_turn
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	More if it is a little swelling, then immediately tell him that and cut away that which is of no use.</end_of_turn
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then immediately suspend it with a bandage, and drain that, and immediately do that; and tighten the bandage with stitches, and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .li.	Chapter ends.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of cutting of swelling that happens from the heel that happens to the belly.</end_of_turn
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It ends up at the nails of those women who wear stockings in the bellies of those and in the other parts of the body of those who are affected by fungal diseases similar to those which have fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head is thick; and already the lips of those are spoken of, and it is of those that is small, and is of those that is not magnificent.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one in the belly of which there were two patients who were greater than fungi resembling each other, and there was no difference between the white ones, of little root.</end_of_turn
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	The lips of those patients were swollen and puffy, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I recommend that you insert your finger into the hollow of the foot where it hurts and the other that you see it there.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider the time if the disease is humous, and if the colour of the boils is white, humous, from slight causes; then you will make a small incision with the point of your scissors, and while you are present there cauterize the focus, because the black matter that has been expelled from the incision must be expelled without delay; and if you blow out the black matter, cauterize it again
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if sometimes the disease is painful and fearful, hold your hand off the incision with a pincer; however the time has passed recently made, and strengthen that boil, which is the manner in which we have said; and let it rest for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And so adjust in the stiffness of the thread of the pincer; therefore, do not cease strengthening the pincer greatly until it is detached and falls away by itself
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if there is a great cause, the time in the incision of them is a cause of fear and pain, especially in that which is in the belly
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Perhaps you will have to make an incision of the greater part of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And so take care of that until the wound is healed
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And keep in mind that you do not presume to make an incision of that which is of yellow colour, of little sensation, of little regard, because that is abscesses
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remind you that I have forgotten nothing concerning this matter
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the care of the navel's eminence
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is caused by many causes; or for cracks of the sacrum which is over the belly, and these you will cover with cloth or swelling as in other ruptures; or for healing which flows from veins or arteries as is said above, or for windiness that is stifled in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	However, if it is for a crack of the sacrum and for swelling of the cloth, the colour of the pus is similar to the colour of blood; and it is painful, and appears in various positions
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the evacuation of the bowels, the time in which it is in that place from which we have recounted, of more or less diverse ways, and as you have previously said that which we must consider concealed, and then return; and if you blow out that which is in the bowels, it is strengthened greatly by the introduction of bath and violent work
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	However, if it is for moisture, the time is painful and is not concealed when you place your hand over it, nor is it constricted, nor is it swollen
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for healing, the time until this black appears again is declining
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	However, if there is no bone, the time is pus thick, thick and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	However, if it is for windiness, the time for it is painful
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider the time if the navel's eminence is for the healing of an artery or a vein, or for windiness; the time that you must prohibit the care of it, because in that case there is fear and pain just as I have said concerning the pus for an artery and a vein
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel's eminence is for the bowels or for the cloth, the time that you command the patient to have his legs stretched out; and that you put your hand over the circumference of all the navel, and that you order him to place his hands between your two thighs, and that you surround the circumference of the navel around the area where you have said that you put your hand; and that you extend the bulk of the pus to the buttocks as much as one can; and that you bind the circumference tightly or loosely and gently
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so you will bring out the other part of the pus extended over the ligament and put your finger into that place and you will ask him to expel the bowel; and if you have not observed or guarded for the ligament, the time that you have extracted will expel the bowel from the parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, the time takes that which is one time; and you will make incisions of the surplus of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May it be contrary to your surgery or vein, when you have encircled that limb, and you have returned to your operation; take two needles and pierce through those two holes firmly, and insert two needles into the circumference which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which shall penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles in and let the swelling subside until the extended flesh falls off by itself; or cut away that which is subtle and will fall off, and then cure that which remains inside until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the swelling of the navel is neither of flesh nor of moisture, when you have covered the abscess as we have said and drawn out the disease or moisture which you find in it, then cure that which remains inside and consolidate the area
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of abscess.</start_of_turn>
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the species of abscess and how to treat it with medicines, and that it is dangerous to treat it with fire so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that abscesses are caused by great pain and caution in their treatment.</start_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And I say that some old doctors believe that certain abscesses are incurable in their place, just as some abscesses which are in the breasts or in the groin and are similar to those which are in the limbs and which must be removed in order to remove all of that, and more so when they are small.</start_of_turn
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and is severe, do not attempt to touch it, for I have never seen it healed by such a means, neither have I seen anyone else, nor is it possible for it to be cured by this.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it is when it is possible, as we have said, that you precede by evacuating the patient and purging with black bile several times, and then sprinkle that [medicine] on it, if it is found to be present in excess.</start_of_turn
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in the way in which it is located in the operation, and put on the gloves to cover that; and with great care move from every side around the cord around the abscess until no cause remains of the reasons for its existence.</start_of_turn
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the wound run its course, and do not touch it carelessly, and press the parts, and evacuate the pus with your hand or with an instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if it seems contrary to the course of the wound to make an incision of a vein or an artery, when the flow of the wound has ceased, then cauterize that which remains until the bleeding has ceased, and then cure that which remains of the other treatment until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.</start_of_turn
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of dropsy.</start_of_turn
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, the species of dropsy of water, and their symptoms, and the treatment of them with medicines.</start_of_turn
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is treated with fire is only the species of ulcers alone, and it is not approached with fire to the species of tympani or to the species of swelling, for that is deadly.</start_of_turn
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of dropsy of the tympani with medicines and do not confirm your medicine, then consider that if the patient has already achieved relief from the pain, or if there is another disease alongside this one, just as if it were in the throat or the chest, do not give him fire, for fear of that.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if sometimes the patient has an excessive vomiting, and there is no other disease but simple dropsy, neither young nor old, then the manner of the operation for it is that you elevate the patient between your legs, and hold his belly with your hand, fill the water to the part beyond the navel, and take sponge sponges in this way:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	both of two acute ends long, with the acute extremity thus as sponge; but indeed in any slight space small by small, so that in the operation for it there does not enter into the intestine, and that you lead out that.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for in that case you must be at the navel for the amount of three fingers beyond, in the tract of it over the navel.</start_of_turn
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is from a disease of the spleen, then your incision should be to the left of the navel for three fingers.</start_of_turn
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the cause of their suffering is the spleen, then their section should be in the left side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	It is not necessary to make the incision over the cost over which the patient is suffering, for fear of bringing on further harm to that sensitive area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce through the instrument all the way to the spleen, and enter into that area, and lift your hand over the sponge between the cord and the skin, and you will extract it; and if there is any quantity of blood or pus, do so cautiously
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the sac until the sponge reaches the place it wants to go, which is the place of the water
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of this kind:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or ebony or gold, and at the lower part of it is a little hook, and on the sides of it are three hooks: two on one side and one on the other side; and its handle is pointed according to the manner of a pen, just as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the procedure, the armillary bandage should be applied, because when the instrument reaches the water, then so much blood will be evacuated from the instrument that a large amount of blood will be evacuated in that moment. If you evacuate less than this in an hour, then much more pain will remain from the solution of the vital spirit or from the injuries to the five senses that are close to death
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate in this way according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient and according to what you understand from the patient's condition and the benefit of the patient's virtue and the fear of his death.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the blood which causes this, because so much of it is retained by the sponge which retains the hook that is over the sac from which it comes. I recommend that you perform this according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And so repeat the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of blood, and do this for several days in order to be careful, and keep yourself from making a mistake until there is little or no blood left
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, and you see that there is a great quantity of blood, then cure that one by burying it in lukewarm sand, bathe his wound in broth, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver are close to the evacuation of the blood, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	The text ends here.</start_of_turn>
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Concerning the care of children whose urinary organs have not yet been perforated.</start_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some women believe that with some of the children the head of the mixture is not perforated (or is slightly torn or is not in its proper place).</start_of_turn
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore it is necessary to cover as much as possible that which is born with a sponge quite soft in this way:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And put under the hole a soft plum nail and bind it, and keep it for three days or for four days
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wants to urinate, he should be urged to urinate, and then return it.</start_of_turn>
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the nail, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not reach this hole.</start_of_turn
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the hole is very small, it should be treated with a plum nail, as we have said, for three days before it becomes enlarged.</start_of_turn
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the hole is not in its place, that is to say, those in whom the cause is that the head of the bladder is twisted so that it cannot urinate downwards, until you elevate the bladder with your hand to the upper parts; and it is not for the generation, for in this case the sperm cannot reach the woman according to custom, and this is an ailment that does not go away.</start_of_turn>
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The manner of performing the operation for this is that the patient should be placed over the genitals, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand during extraction, and pierce the head of the bladder of the belly of the fetus with a sharp sponge, just as if it were written with a pen, or that you do not cut any part, so that the membrane should remain similar to the head of the bladder and that the hole should fall in the proper place as much as possible.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And take care that in your operation for childbirth, that no accidents occur during delivery; and stop when you see that the childbirth is about to take place, and care for the wound until it has healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol.lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The swelling which happens in the groin at the head of the testicles, of swelling and bruising and blackening and adhesion of the testicles at the head of the testicles.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This swelling happens usually in the testicles and is an indication of bad blood circulation.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from this there are two kinds: one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant: if you suspend it with a sponge and bind up what is inside until all the swelling has gone down; and then place your hand over that area to support it, and do this until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant, of a dark colour, then you must administer cautery close to the origin of the swelling and in the ratio of the swelling.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May be if the swelling is in the groin not circumcised, and one part of the swelling is inwards and the other part is outwards, then you must keep the swelling inwards until it is consolidated; and when you have cured that outwards, because when you have cured that outwards, it is not certain that the inwards will not be broken through.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already the swelling happens in the genitals and in the groin blackening and corruption, where you must conquer everything that is already blackened and that is already becoming corrupted or that is already corrupted; and put pressure over that area until it is better, which is made with flour of barley and millet seeds and with lead shot and nails.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And do this until it is healed
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May be if there is discharge of pus, then administer lunar cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the cautery will be useful both for the pus discharge and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the testicles is corroded and is destroyed in an hour, then you must insert into the meat of the testicles a a plum catheter so that the patient can urinate through that
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the testicles (and this adhesion does not happen except in that of which the prepuce is soft, and over it circumcision is not required; and when it happens through plague or by swelling) you must scrape with an obtus sponge until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the testicles is relaxed entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them completely, then you must scrape with a sponge over the head of the testicles and the prepuce, and help so that the prepuce, when it is soft, is perforated by its softness itself
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the prepuce from the head of the testicles with a strip of fine silk, which already is wet in the cold water so that it does not adhere to another swelling.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And do this until it is healed with wine bandage until it is consolidated
Capitol .lvii.	The swelling which happens in the groin at the head of the testicles, of swelling and bruising and blackening and adhesion of the testicles at the head of the testicles.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the upbringing of children and the care of those who are circumcised
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to the continuity of life just like any other plague: however, even if it is of our operation and our will, and although it is properly done in children, it is necessary that we assign in this better operation and way less suffering loss of life.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their laws, because it is not found in their laws, and it is only because we have learned through experience that many surgeons and barbers use circumcision and upbringing with new methods and with nails; and they use thread and gum.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I myself have tried all these methods and I do not find any better way than with forceps, thread and gum in upbringing like with nails, because many veins flee from the wound, because the cord of the prepuce is doubled over two tunics, and remains more relaxed, and the tension is greater behind than in front, and therefore it is more easily perforated at another incision and with greater pain
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in upbringing for alphbetism, which is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the member is not followed, because it is strong and enters the cavity of it
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However in the operation with nails, because of the iron and the corruption of the work
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many swellings do not need upbringing in this way, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May be the cause of the discomfort that comes from the forfexes and ligaments is the excessive tension of the bones, for the acute that is above is equal to the acute that is below; and therefore as you touch your hand so are provided two acute ones, and incisions are made according to a comparison in a time; and it is a useful compression of the faithful figure containing the codena of the whole part, without which there is no error of any kind.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The manner of the first operation is that you must make the child lie down if he is young, that you do not force him but rather lie him down on his side alone, and that you leave him like that until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And thus do that which pleases in all this manner as much as you are able, because he who receives your intelligence
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And thus do that your hands are prepared to stay between your thighs, and do not be inert; and hide the forfexes in your hand or at the feet of the child, so that he does not see them or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And thus do put your hand on the belly of the child and breathe in the cavity, and pull that which is within until it reaches the head of the cavity, and then modify that which is added to it from the outside.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And thus do bind the sign with faithful bending, and bind below that a little one as much as necessary, and put your hand on the chest and indicate to him the place of the ligament below with good retention, and make incisions between two ligaments
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thus do elevate the head of the cavity up gently and stretch the head of the cavity; and leave little by little, for it is better; and stop the powder above and put a layer of powder on the powder in which is spread soft mucus with oil of rosemary recently good; and leave that on until the next day; and care for that which is cared for until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The way of the forfexes in the manipulation, this is the way:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The one is blunt at the tip and the other is pointed, that it is not seen from the thumb, and the length of the two acute ones is as much as the length of two thumbs equally.</end_turn>
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More the error in manipulation is that it forces out the intrinsic codena of the whole, or part of it from the incision.</end_turn>
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore you must extend that which is from your hand towards your nail before the retraction of the area and that you make the incision according to equality.</end_turn
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot have it at your nail, then extract that with a hook and make the incision.</end_turn>
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More if three days have passed, and remain what is swollen below the cavity, then you must leave that until the swelling of the wound has gone down, and evacuate that with ease, and make the incision as you are prepared.</end_turn
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And take care of the head of the cavity, because it will not be useful to it.</end_turn>
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore care for that which is in which the wound has consolidated from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise of the powders.</end_turn
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incut with measure, and you obey to the parts above, then you will not notice it.</end_turn><end_turn>
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And more care for that which we have said until it is healed.</end_turn><end_turn>
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.</end_turn>
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the care of retained urine in the bladder.</end_turn>
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is useful for excessive fullness by stone or for constipation, or for weakness or for tumor, and it remains as those which we have said concerning the methods of care in the division.</end_turn
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention of it is for stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then you must comfort the patient over the thighs.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And thus do place the feet of that over the two thighs and extend the belly of the part below the two thighs, and comfort the patient as much as possible.</end_turn
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore when the neck of the bladder is pressed it drives out the stone to the back parts, because the urine is expelled.</end_turn
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said beforehand, it is useful to know the cause of the patient, for you must administer extraction of it with an instrument which is called siringua, of which this is the form: of silver and of hammered gold conquered, like a pen with a needle of gold as long as a palm, to which be added a tube of silver at the head of it.</end_turn
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And take the urine from the patient, having first doubled the faith and placed it on the edge of the wound or ulcer for a good connection; then introduce the faith into the part below the circumference of the wound, and prick with needles if there is any excess of the wound, but do not introduce the needle too deeply. And immediately increase the circumference of the wound with border and album of oil.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient spit on the heel, and bandage the wound and the edge with olive oil and vinegar, and olive oil and herbs.</end_of_turn>
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And immediately introduce the circumference around the ease of the wound so that it reaches the root of the ulcer; and immediately double the ulcer downwards to the level of the navel; and immediately press the circumference inwards so that the wound is not too tight; and immediately press that inwards so that it reaches the bladder, and that will make the patient be relieved of the cause of the wound, and it is not good like this, but rather in the place where there is torment.</end_of_turn>
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually pull out the faith with the wound so that the urine wets the wound.</end_of_turn>
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And take out that and do urine therapy, and use a sponge, do not leave it inside and use a sponge until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels relief.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 60.</end_of_turn>
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of the bladder catheterization clamp and the instruments that are in agreement with it.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or swelling in the bladder, or if it is contracted too tightly, and you wish to drain urine and medicines, then it is good to use a catheter with a clamp, and this is how it is done:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Unless in the part it is deaf, so is closed.</end_of_turn
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three channels: two from one side, like how many times.</end_of_turn
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is soft, in which there is water that is rolled up, and as much as it is pressed, so will be added, until when any cause is over that is thrown from the humors, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled, the water is thrown out as much as it was thrown in, and when it is expelled long, as the clamp does which is placed on the naptha of the sea battles.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to expel humors from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humor, and draw out that water that is rolled up to the parts below, because the humor is expelled from the concavity of the clamp.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And immediately insert the extremity of the clamp into the ulcer according to what we have recommended in the circumference; and immediately press the humor with water, because that humor will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel relieved of that.</end_of_turn
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle catheter for which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the following form:</end_of_turn
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is good to make it of silver or of lead, of which the head is like a small plume, and leave it inside without any support.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And immediately take the bladder from movement, and stop in that the humor you wish to catheterize in the bladder, and immediately bind that between two strong ligatures with a doubled faith, and scald that humor over the fire.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And immediately insert the extremity of the catheter into the ulcer.</end_of_turn
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And immediately put your hand over the bladder with the humor stretched out until the patient feels that that humor has already reached the bladder.</end>
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if your bladder is not present, then take a little sponge and make a circle of it; and pierce that through its whole roundness; and immediately insert a strong faith through those holes, even though it is revolted; and immediately add the circle so that it is added to the bath, because you have stopped in that water that you wish to expel humors from, and oil and herbs.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And immediately bind that to the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humor reaches the bladder.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of stones.</end_of_turn
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stones and their care with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the phlegmas and stones generated in the bladder, and we have mentioned that.</end_of_turn
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that the pain in the foot which we are now dealing with is called gout.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pain which is caused by the cold humors that infiltrate the body is called gout.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And thus we are stating that the exposure of the disease is clear and concise
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the pain which is caused in the bladder mainly affects children; and from the symptoms of the disease it is known that the urine which comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the disease is accompanied by frequent vomiting, pale face and swelling of the belly.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is laughable that the children recover from this within fourteen years; and it is difficult to cure them when they are old
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Indeed in the young it is easier because of that which exists between these two
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the cause of the disease is greater and the cure is easier; and if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we reach the cure of that, cover at the beginning of that which we must change the cause of the disease which makes the whole wound which is in the joints of the thighs; because that wound many times prevents the infection of the bladder due to the inquiry of the disease.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And thus prescribe the disease to the thighs and feet and count and hold the hand of the patient so that the bladder may descend to its place or that some of the intestines may be thrown out
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And thus do that which is between your thighs, and that most of them shall leave the cushions of their thighs so that the whole bladder may be easily drained downwards to the parts below
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And thus do all of those things which have been said before.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the pain in the space, then do so with a pointed cautery to cut around it as much as possible
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel all of it, then touch with your hand the area which we call the left hand, if the disease is in children, or say half if it is an adult, and enter with that into the thigh behind the knee
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And inquire about the pain until it has left the knee
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that little by little inside the belly of the bladder
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And thus put your hand over that which we call the left hand, and expel that to the outside of the body in the place from which we made the incision
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the minister to hold the bladder with his left hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs with his right hand and with his left hand grasp the skin which is left behind the thighs, from the place where the incision was made
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus do the above-mentioned things, this is the way of them:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut between the knee and the thigh, not in the middle of the thigh, towards the left side of the left cushion; and make the incision over that pain and the said hand should be held either in the thigh or at the knee, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision outside may be wide enough for the amount of urine which comes out of the bladder to be possible, and not greater, for if you make it too wide you will compress the hand which is in the thigh behind the knee due to the incision, and it will be useless to you
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And be aware that of the pain there is some degree and margin, for that is difficult for it to be cured
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that urine which comes out is like lukewarm lukewarm, it is round, and it is good for it to be lukewarm
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if that is the degree which is at the angles and margins, join in the fissure
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus widely performed, then do so that your hand rests upon that, or that you strengthen over that limb conveniently, the limb which is like a limb to which you strengthen over the pain, and do not omit that; or that you put the instrument inside in order to curve the limb.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you do not succeed over that, then expand a little the wound, and if you see a flow of urine, cut away that which is yellow and acrid.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the pain is more than one, then at the beginning put your hand to the mouth of the bladder and touch with your hand; and then touch with a little bit of urine; and do the same if there are many grains of sand.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is not great, ignorance is that you suspect that the patient has an excessive quantity of urine, which either causes or contributes to the swelling of the urine.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May administer an purgative before it is expelled, or perform an incision in the fracture with forceps until the stone is extracted in pieces.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood and strengthen it.</end_of_turn>
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And rest upon that wound immersed in oil and wine, or in scented oil and warm water, so that the wound does not adhere.</end_of_turn
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then raise the patient on the bed and do not remove the bandage until the third day.</end_of_turn>
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the wound has healed, bathe the area with water and oil, and take care of it with ointment diaphincicon and diabezicilin until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If there is an abscess in the wound, adhere and soften it with ointment, for if it resembles ice in the bladder, and the urine is prohibited (for this is known as the discharge of the bladder with urine), then remove the said stone from the wound and extract it, for if it remains it will cause the bladder to swell and decompose.</end_of_turn
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and against all spices, with what agrees with the treatment until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover at all times the care that you have placed on the area and adjust the medications that have been placed over the area.</end_of_turn>
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and is in the meat of the heel, and is fixed there, and if there is retention of urine, it is customary to cure that which we have recommended before, since it is perceived to cause injury; and indeed it is said that this cure brings about the evacuation of the stone.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a triangular shape, extracted from the heel, acute, fixed in the socket.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take care that the heel does not hold the stone back, and that you tie that so that the stone does not return to the bladder.</end>
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the needle into the heel, perforating easily until the needle reaches the stone.</end_of_turn
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle on your hand over that small stone, and you will pierce the perforation of it until you have pierced that of the other side to make the urine flow freely.</end_of_turn
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And place your hand over what is left of the stone from the part that was fractured, which is squeezed, and is evacuated with the urine, and the patient is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment does not please you for any reason that hinders it, then tie a thread to leave the stone in place, and another thread to pull out the stone.</end_of_turn
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And burn around the stone in that heel between two threads.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract that.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And remove the thread and bind the wound with gauze, which is useful in the wound.</end_of_turn
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to leave the thread to hold the stone in place, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other thread to pull out the stone, for when it is withdrawn the thread will bring back the stone to its place and will heal the wound.</end_of_turn>
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason when you pull out the thread, elevate the limb above that of the wound, or that the stone returns to its place, and heal the wound as we have said.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.</end_of_turn>
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of a stone from the heel.</end_of_turn>
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in the heel is rarely engendered.</end_of_turn
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in any of these, it is difficult to cure them, and is prohibited by experienced people.</end_of_turn
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the strong limb is limping.</end_of_turn
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is that you do not find the limb well aware that it groans if you put anything in the physician's hand when it is cast, or if it is of the limbs that have had a marriage.</end_of_turn
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third sentence translates to: "The third is that you must not have any woman present who is not well acquainted with this art, especially the operation with my hand."
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the place of the incision on the foot in women is far from the place of the stone, because it may cause a counter-incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	May be if it is necessary to provoke it at this time, the hour is that you take a large woman who is well learned, and few are more prudent
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	May be if you do not have that one, the hour is that you take a large woman of experience, or present a matron who is well-versed in the matters of women, or a woman who has been well-taught in this art
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make her present, and command her to do whatever you order, from the questioning about the stone from the beginning; for the reason is that it regards whether the woman is a virgin, the hour is that you put all that you said at the end of her and desire the stone.</start_of_turn>
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find that one, cover her and leave her with what you said, and the hour command her to mark on that.</start_of_turn>
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	May be if she is not a virgin, the hour commands the matron to insert what was said into the groin of the patient and grasp the stone, since she puts her left hand on the bladder, and press that one with good understanding.</start_of_turn
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find that one, the hour covers that gradually pull that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below until it reaches the level of the cushion.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then mark on that impression of the heel of the patient's foot the level of the cushion of whatever part it is that has been stopped and centered the stone in that place, and do not move the patient's foot from that point.</start_of_turn
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision is to be slight at the beginning; and then insert the hook over that incision, and if you feel the stone, the hour adjust in the incision according to the quantity that you know the stone will be discharged from that.</start_of_turn
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the species of stones are various: that some are small and large, and flat and sharp, and long and round, and have bumps.</start_of_turn
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you must know what species they are of that you signify about what you wish.</start_of_turn
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of urine, adjust at the wetted navel for an hour until the urine is gone, and then return to your operation until the stone is discharged.</start_of_turn
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make ready all your instruments that are said in the extraction of stones in women, so that you are helped by them in your operation.</start_of_turn
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of urine, and you know that the expulsion of the urine is from the kidney that is incised, the hour you stop the powder on the spot and open that which is dusty and tough, and do not proceed further; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for it will strengthen the patient.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua.	And take care of the wound.</start_of_turn
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the urgency of the urine has passed a few days, and the wound has healed, the hour you return to your operation until the stone is discharged.</start_of_turn
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.</start_of_turn>
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision for an abdominal hernia.</start_of_turn
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An abdominal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac which is left the codena of the genetia containing the fluid, and is called a sac.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And many times it is in the proper pouch which nature has prepared in the part of the fluid, until it is known that there is already another fluid; and it is the codena of the genetia between the white sac which we have mentioned, and it is not water but pus.</start_of_turn
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is for excess of belly fat that happens to the genetia, because at those it infiltrates this matter, and sometimes happens by a violent blow that is made on the genetia.</start_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors, because its color is declining to orange or bloody, or even black feculent, or white liquid, and that is the best.</start_of_turn
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which you know that this accumulation of liquid is in the white sac that we mentioned, is that when it is removed it appears rounded declining slightly in length like a figure of water, and shows the genetia, because the liquid contains that throughout.</start_of_turn
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the humidity is in the proper panicle, then the latter heat will be round about the part of the fire and for this reason it is estimated that it is another fire.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the humidity is between the crease of the thighs and the white hip, then the catarrh stops there.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you wish to recognize the color of the humidity, then you should spread the color of the humidity on the surface of the parts that precede; and according to what is seen in the remnants, judge what is inside
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the care of the patient, we must command the patient to be flexible if it is possible, and sometimes we must loosen the clothing of the patient
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And thus rest upon the seat two cushions on any cause, and keep away the movement of the drape.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And thus sit on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends his arm from two fingers to the crease of the thighs and to the part of the flank of the belly
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And thus take hold of the palm of your hand and split the crease of the thighs from the middle to the length within the fifth space
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the cut should be made according to the rule at an equal distance from the line that must divide the hair of the thighs, until it reaches the white hip including
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And drain out the one, and observe, and keep me informed so that I do not make that incision; and your incision with which you make the incision so that it should be suspended in the middle of the fire and written clearly on the incision according to the quantity that is possible for you
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And thus pierce the full belly with a wide perforation, and extract all the water
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And thus separate between two layers the skin of the incision with nails, and stretch the belly outwards; and do not touch the crease of the thighs including, and make the incision in that manner that is possible for you
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And make the incision in its entirety or in pieces, and more especially on the lateral side, because if you do not carefully examine the incision of the patient, it is not without risk that the water will return
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	More if the fire proceeds from that side of the body at the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the belly, return that which has come out, and then adjust the two layers of the crease of the thighs with suture, and take care of that as well as the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the fire corrupted by another disease, then command that you ligate the veins which are sore the suppliers, and extract the fire, and take care of that as we have said above
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	More if the water is added in two equal parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore make the incision in that part as you have done in the other equally; and if it is in your sight that it is an operation, then make the incision indeed
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And thus cleanse the wound, and enter into the sections of the skin submerged in oil or in oiled; and stop for a while another layer which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over two thighs and the belly; and stop overcloths doubled and powder, and bind those over with a bandage that is made in this fashion:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and thus take two cloths and stuff them with wadding according to this likeness; and make firm the extremities where there is movement of the bone or wet wool, and attach them with a structure in the groin of the thighs, and one of the extremities preforms the buttock inside two, and the other preforms the buttock outside the fifth space, and two extremities over two toes and two extremities on two ankles, and all the structure is adjusted in the groin of the thighs.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And many physicians treat this hernia artificially with cautery in place of incision with the knife; and it is that you take a pointed cautery and insert it into that crease of the thighs, and ignite it as we have recommended until it is discovered that the white belly containing the water has been broken, and then you take the cautery in this fashion:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is assembled in Greek letter
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And thus pierce that belly, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And thus stretch the belly with nails, and drain out with nails, and drain out with pointed cautery; and make the incision as it is possible for you until you have eradicated all of it; and keep me away from the fire that the fire does not touch the skin.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	He grasped that this operation is more dangerous and lengthy than an incision, and better left alone.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Indeed, if you are hesitant to perform an incision in the heat of battle or at the moment of cautery, or if there is a flow of blood, know that you must take care of any anomaly that may arise to you, as is customary in such cases.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Although the patient is poor and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, know that you must perform an incision as I have recommended previously; and it is confirmed that you must do so, for this is what we have said about the significance of this hernia.</end_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Know that you must make the patient lie down on any elevated surface, then make the incision in the lower part of the limb at the side of the foot, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.</end_of_turn>
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to drain out all the fluid.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand over the area and tie off the one and leave the other, so that the fluid remains within.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Indeed, if an anomaly occurs during the draining of the fluid in that moment you must perform an incision: and this is not useful except when the white pus in the wound makes an anomaly and hinders the flow of blood; in this case you must either remove the pus from the wound with a pin or adjust the pressure of the wound with a small instrument.</end_of_turn
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Know that the fluid will return, and this should be allowed to happen in about six months or in the spring; and when it has returned, perform the incision once more in the same manner as before, for the patient will then be free of pain for several days.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxiii.	End of document.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Section on carbuncular hernia and its treatment.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of loss of sensation in the great limbs; for I have seen the diminution of them and their saving for the better.</end_of_turn
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation for this and the types of cautery.</end_of_turn
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the cautery arises in the parts where the tendons are composed and is useful for many causes: or for acute excessive swelling, which is spread over the tendons, or for percussion.</end_of_turn
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the cautery is according to the color of the limb, and is not found in the pain, and is difficult cautery.</end_of_turn
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the soft cautery is bluish, from which the color is dark, and is not harmful to it.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And many doctors find it useful for the nodulation of the arteries, and for inflammation of those as well as when it is already perceived, or for the inflammation of veins.</end_of_turn
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Indeed, that which is for the inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the cautery when you compress that at the joints mentioned; and it is not to be touched.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And that which is useful for the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause except compression at those mentioned.</end_of_turn
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that concerning this kind there is utility of incision and on the others meats; that you insert the needle of the genetius and then stretch the skin to the lower parts, and extract that from the white fat, and release the blood vessels, and ligate them, and insert more of the thread than you extract from the whole part of the limb.</end>
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the limb is already hardened in those carnitous matters, then you must extract the limb and insert it again.</end_of_turn
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any cause of the fat, or between those that are between the vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and insert again that by incision.</end_of_turn
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Indeed, if there is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must insert all that is of it, and extract the limb as we have said.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with soft wool soaked in olive oil and wine; and take care of it as with the other care until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxiv.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	From the care of hernia which is of vital importance.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is a swelling surrounded by any covering resembling a sprout with a softening of the testicles, and it is difficult for the patient to exercise and walk due to the disease.</end_of_turn>
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease is to fear what precedes the memory.</end_of_turn
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However say we must do the operation when the first sign appears.</end_of_turn>
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that you should make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and that you suspend the testicles to the lower parts; and that you take hold of the genitals with your thighs which are proved to the groin; and that you have the other assistants that you wish, and extend those with a violent extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then you make an incision on the outer side of the ankle with a sharp knife to cut through the vessels until they are discovered.</end_of_turn
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then evacuate all the parts as we have said in the extraction of the intestines which are in the temples.</end_of_turn
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then leave in that place a needle which is faithful to the double, and tie one at the first place of the area where you made the incision, and tie the other end at the back of them.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then you make an incision in the middle of the limb for a broad cut according to the length of the body, and extract whatever is added of the foul and corrupt humors.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then care for the wound with the care of the other wounds in which you wish to generate so that the vessels which support one of the two testicles do not go dry, which is not harmful in this case.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Indeed if the veins should all be cut, it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that they be tied up so that they are separated from the vessels, because it is private of all nourishment for the wound of the vessels, and that they are established, or that they be brought together so that they are not harmful to those.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxv.	End of treatise.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	The care of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The cause of this hernia is a section that extends from the navel to the lower part of the abdomen, because due to that rupture the bowel of that break is added to the other bowels.</end_of_turn
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either from the cicatrix or from the excess of the intestines, and this hernia occurs due to various causes: or percussion, or coughing, or straining, or elevation of any kind, or by any other means.</end_of_turn
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this is that when it is due to the extension of the abdomen, it does not occur suddenly, but gradually over a long period of time, and the swelling is gradual and does not disappear, and the abdomen compresses the bowel.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is that when it is due to the section of the abdomen, it immediately causes severe pain; and that the swelling appears outside the navel and towards the flanks of the abdomen, and that the bowel is displaced towards the flanks of the abdomen.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And many times it is forgotten in the bowels the fabric, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And many times it is useful with winds, and many times it runs in the bowels through a wound, and here it is retained, and it is in this that great pain of the disease arises, and many times it causes great pain and more when it is pressed.</end_of_turn
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these diseases of this disease there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the treatment in that case.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The way of operating for this is that you command the patient to reduce the abdomen with his hand to the bottom of his curvature if he obeys your command, and that you place a cushion over his belly between your thighs, and elevate the legs of the patient.</end_of_turn
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then you grasp the testicles with the thumb and index finger of your hand, and make an incision through the entire length; and then fix at two points the edges of the incision as you wish to open the incision with those.</end_of_turn
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is as much as you are able to do, that from that there may be some forgotten liquid.</end_of_turn
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then evacuate that bloody fluid which is left from the incision of the testicles, until the white tough membrane of some part is discovered.</end_of_turn
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	The testicles are between the white testicles, which is where the codena of the urine resides, and between the second testicle, and it relieves that adhesion which is at the back of the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then remove the bladder from the testicles and bring the white testicles closer to the left hand, and extend the testicle towards the section; command the minister to extend the urine towards the outside and you will dissolve the adhesion that is behind the solution done.</end_of_turn>
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And be sure that there is no cause for the intestines being covered in the white testicles.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	Even if you find any cause, then leave it to the belly alone.</end_of_turn>
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle with a thick thread that makes four holes, and pierce the one that is below the testicles, which is under the urine sac; and pierce the extremities that you have mentioned above so that there are four holes in total, and pass the thread through each figure in a cross; and tie with that which we said was left under the testicles with a strong thread of two parts.</end_of_turn
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And wrap the ends of the thread and tie them securely so that no vessels that are nourished by those veins can communicate with each other and cause any recurrence.</end_of_turn
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And leave another layer of thread further from the first one, about three fingers; and make two knots at the end of the testicles where the urine sack is, as much as the size of the finger, and pierce the rest according to the roundness, and keep the urine in it.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And pierce the back of the testicles to release the urine that is in the sack as we have recommended previously.</end_of_turn
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And administer an ointment composed of lard submerged in oil, and apply it to the wound; administer the thread that we have recommended (since several veins of the white testicles are cauterized, which we have mentioned above in relation to the fear of the flow of urine, because several veins are burnt out).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case is delayed, let cold water be poured, and keep it on until it falls as we have mentioned.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound with the other care of wounds until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.</end_of_turn>
De hernia ventosa.	Of pulmonary hernia.</end_of_turn
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia nothing has been observed that could be useful in its treatment.</end_of_turn
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	First say that it is useful in this hernia as we have recommended in the hernia of the bladder; that is, you tie the vessels near the section above where the urine comes out; and dry the area around the abscess in order to remove it with the urine until the vessels fall down.</end_of_turn
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Take care of the wound as we have said until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.</end_of_turn
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is useful in the groin.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Several veins must break in the groin as we have said, and examine the area.</end_of_turn
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not suspect any cause of the abscesses in the groin; and if you suspect, it is little; return immediately in all hours.</end_of_turn
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Even if it is prolonged, adjust a fissure in the bladder so that the abscess comes out of the bladder; this is what causes the extension of the bladder, which is what we have mentioned above in relation to the fear of the flow of urine, because the bladder is stretched and the area is exposed.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the care for it is like that which precedes the narration.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And several veins are cured with iron according to this manner: the patient sits on the seat between your thighs, and you dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses by cutting around the circumference according to the width of three fingers.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And tighten the white testicles that are under the urine sac until they are uncovered.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take the thread and keep it on the prominent part of the bladder, and press that to the navel.</end_of_turn
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And now draw up the two limbs that are prominent at the end of the radius, and suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And now draw up the limb at the end of the radius, without introducing any fat from the cicatrix, neither extend the gut, nor cause any other way as I will tell you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And now care for the wound as in the treatment of boils, and when incisions are made, soften that and restore the boil until it is consolidated; for the fat is contracted and the swelling is not adjusted.</end_of_turn
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	It is better in this place, for it is more likely to be healthy.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.</end_of_turn>
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the testicles' cord.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The veins that go through the testicles' cord are softened by means of albus, for the meats that are between them are softened, and it is enough for them.</end_of_turn
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When it is necessary in the treatment of these it is done in such a way that the patient lies down two fingers, and cut through the entire cord that is softened above the natural cord; and that the two lips be adjusted at the suture.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, when you begin to soften the cord with three or four incisions and a firm suture.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And now make incisions between the sutures; and care for the other wounds until they are healed and the incisions have fallen off.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.</end_of_turn
De castracio.	Of castration.</end_of_turn
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	It is known to me that castration is forbidden in our laws, however, I recall it from this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two cases, of which the one is that the physician should know how to care for it when asked about it, since he knows the cure for it; and the other case is that we must sometimes castrate other animals for our young, such as mares, and sows, and goats, and pigs, as well as other animals that resemble them.</end_of_turn
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is useful in two ways: either by traction or by incision.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	As for traction, the way is to keep the animal in cold water until the testicles are softened and limp and hanging.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take hold of them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to touch each other.</end_of_turn
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	As for castration that is useful by incision and section, hold the animal and grasp the testicles with your left hand.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then ligate the surgeon, and make an incision over each vein with a section that two veins protrude.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And now make incisions of the rest that appear to be ruptured.</end_of_turn
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not worry about those of the cicatrix of any kind, but about the fat that is above the veins.</end_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the traction method, for traction often leaves any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to bite.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And care for the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.</end_of_turn
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the care of hermaphroditism.</end_of_turn
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is in two ways: when it appears that the space between the testicles has been split in two in which there is a space in which there are two testicles with a female organ between them.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes the testicles secrete urine in the space between them.</end_of_turn
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women it is a kind: and that is that the female organ that is on the fifth part is like two testicles of a man a little less and somewhat broader at the root than in a man.</end_of_turn
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the care is of three kinds: two of the men and one of the women.</end_of_turn
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	The wound covers the parts that are swollen inwards, and they must be cured with the care of the other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second sort of men who urinate in the groin, where the testicles are, neither cure nor operation is for them
Capitol .xxi.	(The text ends here.)
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	From languor and prominent flesh because of the women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong languor is adjusted on natural causes so that it is stretched and is felt in the legs; and in many women some veins are increased in size just as in men and even during sexual intercourse
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then cover that the excess of languor has with your hand or thumb and insert it
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not delay in incision, especially in the groin, so that the flow of blood does not diminish
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care of that which must be cured so that it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More flesh is born than is seen in the horror of the mother than fills that which is born; and strong flesh is cast out to the other parts following the custom (and for that reason they call the first “disease caused by excess”); therefore cover that just as we insert the languor, so do we take it out when it is cured
Capitol .lxxii.	(The text ends here.)
De curacio de alratica.	On the care of rats
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The rat is one whose wound of the female is not perforated, or has a small hole
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is for an illness that has preceded it, and that is caused by no flesh being adjusted or by a slippery or thick fluid
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused in the groin of the mother, or in the flanks, or in the belly of the wound, or in the bottom of the wound, and it prevents biting, swelling and inflammation, and strong flesh prevents menstruation
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is useful for regarding the womb, if the swelling is apparent, it is enough; even if it is not apparent, when you touch those who say it or see it
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Even if the swelling is slippery and like mucus, and is in the two lips, when you touch it and break it
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	Then rest over the two lips of the wound, and when you touch them indicate that there are pus there
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is over the two thighs, the thighs are wide apart, and extend the two lips with force until that slippery mucus is broken and the swelling is opened
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take sponges and dip them in oil and place them over the area, and keep your hand over the wound so that the wound does not harden.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	Even if the mucus is thick and sticky, when you insert your finger you must cover it with butter or lint from myrtle
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	Even if the swelling is for flesh, when you insert your thumb, then insert your finger as well
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if you have the medicines that stop the flow of blood, even as aconite, and bloodroot, and henbane, adjusted with an egg white
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And give a wide needle of lead so that the wound is not permanently hardened.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for several days and apply a dry cloth.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the wound with the other care of consolidation until it is healed
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And many times the wounds that occur in the mother do not give birth to other flesh, and when you insert according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	And if there is a fistula in the groin, the fistula in the groin is not to be treated contrary to the custom in any way
Capitol .lxxiii.	(The text ends here.)
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the care of hemorrhoids, tailbone and red swelling that occur in the knowledge of women
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of the veins rather than from the veins themselves because they cause continuous bleeding; and when they are ancient they are called theyls
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those that I have mentioned and their signs, and I say that those who receive care and those who do not receive care
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that today and always when it is in the groin and does not appear to the patient, the hour in which it does not cause pain is not a harmful cure for it.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those which are in the groin about which he complains are those which are cured.</end_of_turn>
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you put the hand of the patient firmly on the thigh and then extend the thumb against the nails, or against the hair, and prick those against the root.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those that you have just incised with the juice of one of the veins incisions, thus as in an abscess and resembling those.</end_of_turn
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then keep the feet covered for an hour, and then stop in cold water.</end_of_turn
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the juice persists, the hour in which it will be in decoction of mustard and of scabs of millet and of pus and of resemblance.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take barley food and comfort that with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with water over two of them.</end_of_turn>
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the juice is evacuated, it is well; otherwise, adhere to two winds, and to the nipples is sacrifice.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take broth and immerse that in the juice of cocksfoot or in the juice of rue or in the juice of ivy with a little wine and adhere to the area; and care for the area until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	More importantly regarding this, cover that you prick with that which is rough regarding that which I have said in the meantime in the swelling.</end_of_turn
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 164.</end_of_turn>
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of puncture of an abscess in the groin.</end_of_turn>
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of abscesses occur accidentally in the groin, thus as cancer and abscess lapident and ulcerous and bulging and carbuncles and fistulas hemorrhoidal and raguarias and swellings and other abscesses.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their species and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I say in this treatise of the abscess of the groin when it comes from the abscesses that accompany healing, and if you want to know how to make the operation of them with iron.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore consider whether the groin pain at the beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, and sometimes when it subsides and when you touch that it does not cause pain, the hour does not suffice for the perforation of it, and care for that which helps on the maturation until the acute of the accident subsides.</end_of_turn
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And the hour covers that you make the hand rest on a cushion which has two cushions; recline on the groin two and adjust the feet of the patient below the belly, and the thighs are spread out, and keep the knees bent, and tie whatever is convenient to the water.</end_of_turn
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows behind the doctor and administer the instrument with which the opening of the groin is made, the form of which will come in those causes that make it necessary.</end_of_turn
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it covers when you want to administer this instrument that you stay with the hand of the patient in the groin of the woman, and what comes out of the instrument inside the groin is not more than the groin and leads to the disease.</end_of_turn
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	More if the instrument is greater than the groin, the hour covers that you powder over the texture of the groin so that the insertion of any instrument into the groin is prohibited.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it covers that you stop the vomiting that runs in the instrument of the doctor as soon as he has taken hold of the instrument and rotated the vomiting until the opening of the groin is made.</end_of_turn
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the discharge comes, and is grasped with the hand and is lion and bloody, the hour covers that you wash that with a sponge sponge.</end_of_turn
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healing is evacuated, the hour covers that you keep in the wound a compress soaked in olive oil or green oil in which there is any stiffness; and keep the bandage on the section in the groin.</end_of_turn
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And keep for a while the groin and on the wound clean cotton soaked in water in which are boiled mallows.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And so it should be cured within two days at most, when it agrees with the latter that it will be healed when it is whole again.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And so it should be bathed with wine vinegar and salt, and so with wine in which there is boiled licorice or long pepper, and so return to the present.</end_of_turn>
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is deeply rooted in the foot, then you must abstain from its treatment with fire, having treated that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 165.</end_of_turn>
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the mothers how to manage their lives so that they can be treated as doctors when they are away from home according to an unnatural figure.</end_of_turn>
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the mistress should know at the beginning the natural figure of childbirth for her daughters, because when she sees the woman express at the breasts and desire to smell the air, and about that is relieved by that which is over her, she considers that this part is naturally in figure, and that is the spitting of her over the navel, and the second one is that of those who are hanging or suspended or pending from the navel.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, you must compress the belly so that the embryo is delivered slightly before its head comes out, and this is called the expulsion of those superfluities with good management.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	The part that is not natural and unusable is when the embryo is delivered over the feet and the body of the fetus is delivered before the head of the fetus and the feet of the fetus are up, and the hand of the mistress or at the foot of the mistress.</end_of_turn Or it is delivered over the head and the hand of the mistress or at the belly of the mistress, and it is greatly converted over the navel, and it is like the figures that are not usable.</end_of_turn
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the mistress to be learned and prudent in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception.</end_of_turn
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I have shown you all the figures of these things, and what is their meaning so that you understand what is significant and what has been omitted.</end_of_turn>
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is delivered head first through a natural exit, and that is vehement over the woman and is useful to her, sometimes the virtue of the mistress is already diminished, then you must do what the women have, and expel with cinnamon and aromatic oils.</end_of_turn
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And so insert the mistress between the thighs and say little space and open that which is at the second part, or cut that which is at the navel until it comes out what is in it of humidity.</end_of_turn
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it is delivered.</end_of_turn
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come out, you must cover that the woman is moistened with mucus of peas and mucus of cinnamon with cinnamon seeds.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And so command her, so that she be compressed and make her vomit with food; and cover her mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be forgotten for a long time.</end_of_turn
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if two-thirds of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, you must reduce them gradually.</end_of_turn
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the command, you must place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, and so support the cushion on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall from the shock.</end_of_turn
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If two-thirds of them are not expelled, and the fetus dies, you must extract them and remove the fetus from the belly or tie the body to her hand and extract that as well, because that which is forgotten will be forgotten.</end_of_turn>
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Thus concerning the expulsion of the embryo from the thighs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes out on the thighs, you must press those down towards the navel, and so make the fetus small, and so that it engulfs that, and that you grasp a leg of it and extend those little by little.</end_of_turn
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are inside the belly, you must command her to vomit, and make her vomit with food, because if God wills it, it will be forgotten.</end_of_turn
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten in what we have recounted, you must return the fetus little by little until you reach that natural figure, because that which is forgotten will be forgotten in haste.</end_of_turn
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take a high dose of musellage of altea and gum dissolved, and prick all over the bone for a good percussion, and then gently draw out the pus from the belly of the patient.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then do what is necessary to make the patient vomit, until you see the stones pass out.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when sometimes the parts become softened, then make them undergo fumigation with myrrh and pause it for them
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the fumigation has lasted for an hour, then make the patient cough and expel the mucus from their mouth, remove the hand, and press the lower part of the patient's belly with a gentle compression, so that it becomes soft again
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Thus about these things we have spoken and their causes.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When it has become like this, then you must learn to insert little by little the mas of the intestines into the belly; and let the heel of the patient rest on the heel of the thigh, and let the patient's feet hang down, and keep the hands still over the genitals, and finish off the mas
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press gently on the patient's belly little by little, and when the feet of the patient have descended from the ankles until they are ready in the lower part of the belly
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If it has not become soft, then take hold of the patient's feet and move them violently, and press gently on what is over the stones little by little until the patient expels the parts that are coming out.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert the mas back into the belly and slowly restore the patient's belly, and command the heel to expel until the patient becomes soft again.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Thus the lateral extent of the patient's mas lasts until one of the mas has gone out.<end_turn>
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Thus learn to reduce the hand of the patient, even if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the heel and keep it from going away.</start_turn>
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it does not go away, then make the patient lie down on the genitals, and with your thumbs press the patient's genitals vigorously, and give them liament and recommend mucilages.</start_turn><end_turn>
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If it is urgent that he gives birth, then make the patient cough, and study how to reduce the hand, and gently restore the patient's belly to its natural position, and command the heel to expel and order the patient to breathe deeply until he is soft again.</start_turn><end_turn
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Thus about the patient's thigh when it is expanded, the mas and the fascia of the thigh are at two extremes of their greatest extent.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the midwife has the patient's hand and gently turns the little one by little, this will facilitate it.</start_turn><end_turn>
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is thus and when it has been softened, and when the hand has been paused over the patient's heel where we recommended oil and mucilages.</start_turn><end_turn
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command the patient's hand to rise little by little, and when it has finished, make the patient cough and order the heel to be flexed forward, and command the patient to be compressed; and make the patient expel slowly.</start_turn><end_turn
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is ready to be born from the wide side.</start_turn><end_turn
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you must be afraid of the mother according to this manner, consider it, and when you have grasped the second one with your finger until it is evacuated from the moisture.</start_turn><end_turn
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the patient's fetus is hanging over the face and the heel, then you must grasp that of the navel, so that it is not retained and remains.</start_turn><end_turn
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And thus pull out the fetus from the parts downwards until it pauses when it covers, and command the heel to breathe deeply, and the patient will be cured immediately if God wills it.</start_turn><end_turn
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or many fetuses at once.</start_turn><end_turn
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	It is known that when twins are conceived in the same womb, three or four of them sometimes arise, which is strange and usually does not survive; for such things are beyond the power of nature.</start_turn><end_turn
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And this is what is said of them, whether they are twins or more, when they are separated by the navel cord of each one of them, they are delivered whole as if it were a single fetus by natural instinct, and there are some who say that there are several veguadas at the same time, and that is not to be believed as it is not natural.</start_turn><end_turn
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If they are difficult to move, encourage them forcefully and bring them to the point where we mentioned the unnatural figures, for in that case you will care for them in the same way as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the mistress understands and makes it easier and clearer, and arrives on time, and is ingenious according to the entire figure as she has been prepared for the imminent danger to health
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from the embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some doctors consider that a woman in her sixth month of pregnancy has six vergers, and another doctor claims that there are ten vergers in total, which causes pain by measurement of the glorious physicians.</end_of_turn>
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And thus it is necessary for the mistress to know firmly what is like that small thing, and therefore order that she should not touch it.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 166.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.</start_of_turn>
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside, you must certainly use an operation with your hand, for you must consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and is not among those for whom there is fear of loss on account of the things for which she is feared.</start_of_turn
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	You must cover the woman over the thighs over the seat, and her head should be inclined downwards and her buttocks raised.</start_of_turn
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant has that part or is bound in the thigh so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.</start_of_turn
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And moisten the mouth of the mistress with oil of almonds and mucus of aloe and of rue and of sesame seed.</start_of_turn
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And put on the mistress your hand with those oils and mucilages, and interlace your hand in the palm, and seek with your hand in the place where the nails are in the fetus.</start_of_turn
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place it conveniently in that place where you consider whether the fetus is ready that it should be delivered over the head, and when you have left the nails in the heel of the foot, or in the ankle, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or you leave the beard, or in the fork of the tongue, or in the proper places of the ribs, or leave the hip bones.</start_of_turn
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If delivery is made on the feet of the fetus, however, in the fifth month or in the middle of the ribs.</start_of_turn
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And keep the nail with the left hand, and suspend the curvature of the limb in that place which is between the thumb and the little finger, and interlace your hand to facilitate and keep the nail in some of those places that we have mentioned until the cause of expulsion appears.</start_of_turn
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And order to pause and remain in the position of the limb a third if necessary, so that it is equal traction and not extension only according to its rule.</start_of_turn
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And so be gentle in all parts, so that the expulsion of the limb is alleviated as much as is done in the teeth despite the eradication of the fetus.</start_of_turn
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And cover in them what is between them that the extension should be softened; and if any part of them is retained, order that the mistress put on some of those nails with oil and interlace those expected and roll over those that are retained.</start_of_turn
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the limb of the fetus is expelled, leave the nails exchanged among those that are most outward; and do this until the whole fetus is expelled.</start_of_turn
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the hand is expelled before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that because of the magnitude of the limb, order that it be covered with a bandage over that; and extract that until the whole is expelled, and cut that either in the wrist or in the elbow.</start_of_turn
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so cover the other hand and the two feet.</start_of_turn
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is large, or if it is injured by its coarseness in the expulsion, or if there is water adjusted in the head, order that you interlace between the teeth a sponge and split the head and extract the water, or that you break that with a tool which is called “alundat”, the shape of which will be like the shape of the other instruments in the chapter which is adjacent to this.</start_of_turn
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	It is evident that the disease causes great suffering for nature: and that therefore we must instill that medicine which will both nourish and expel that which has been said; and to this end we must extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is swollen and constricted, break the spur of the heel; for when the humidity in the feet is evacuated, it will be expelled
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not be complicated, neither does it obey this; for you must instill the head as much as possible according to your skill
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the belly is swollen with fluid or is in hydrops, you must break that which runs out as soon as the humidity that is in it is evacuated
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is over the knee, the traction of the limb is light and the direction of the limb towards the major opening is light
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is constricted, break the abdomen and the heel; for you must extract that which has infiltrated your hand, and that you break the abdomen and the heel until the fluid that is in them runs out
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are remaining and the head is back, put your left hand inside; if the mouth of the limb is gaping, put your hand in the armpit, and grasp the head, and draw that which is said towards the mouth of the limb, and at the same time bring in one or two fingers, and draw them out again.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the limb is closed by swelling, do not press too hard on it; because it will cause the evacuation of fatty humors. It is necessary to administer an emollient.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Administer plasters; and keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the foot is close to the knee, if possible, is to make an incision: and to administer what has been said concerning the foot seen
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If that is not possible, the hours are to make an incision in pieces, and to extract it
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of the second kind behind.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all your operation, administer what has been said concerning the care of the wound which has occurred in the limb.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is discharge of pus, let it drain in styptic waters and administer the other care
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And indeed I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was a dead fetus, and thereupon I made another incision, and the other fetus was dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that long time has passed after the incision in the navel; and when it is opened, it is found to be filled with blood, and it begins to swell.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to care for it, and I treated it for a long time, but the plague did not consolidate
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I found out some strong plaster of attraction, and I extracted one bone, and I passed four days, and I extracted another bone; and I was amazed that in the belly was no bone
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I left the plague, and I extracted from it five bones, the woman exists in the thousands with her milt in her thighs, and I have seen in such a manner for a long time, correct from her a little mark of the hand
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not cease to be astonished, but that in this is science and a helper that the physician has at his hand for the administration of care.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The way in which the limb is opened.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the way in which the bone is grasped in which two cuts are made at the two extremities of two fingers
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	The incision must be made with great caution, and must be made with a pointed cautery or with a needle or with a boy's fist
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each palm is as two fingers and the margin of each with one finger; and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two fingers there are two adjustments of that middle finger which are already fixed, of which the length is the half of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is as two fingers, or a little more
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additional things are introduced into the mouth of the mother when it is opened with those two prescriptions which you have given for the vertigo.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form that is similar to that of that pus which is subtle and light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It may be made from dust of ivy or from barley, according to the form of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May, however, at the end of them, there are two such additional things which are sometimes added, and the length of these additional things is like a palm, and the width of each is two fingers wide
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you wish to open the mouth of the mother, then do make the woman lie down with her feet hanging down, open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand like a pair of forceps according to the quantity that you wish of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the matrix makes so that you want it
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo which they call the ancient one:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	A form of pressing which is made on the part where the fet is pressed
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	A form of friendship which is made on the part where the great head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps in which teeth are at the end, sometimes like that, and sometimes it is like tweezers in which teeth are like those of a saw which are inserted and contain it.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	A form of slight pressing
Forma de unci havent una spina:	A form of unity having a thorn: this is what is called vertigo which is caused by these humors which we have mentioned previously.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	A form of unity having two thorns: this is what is called the vertigo of the ancients which is caused by these humors which we have mentioned previously
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps in which teeth are of iron with which the head of the fet is contained
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is broken off: this is what is called vertigo of the ancients which is caused by these humors which we have mentioned previously
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas which are wide: this is what is called the vertigo of the ancients which is caused by these humors which we have mentioned previously
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercises, and when they are multiplied with the species of that, and when they are prepared, you must take an artificer, for the more curious you are about your operation and the more numerous you are, the more you must take care of the people for their quantity
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with these instruments, neither do you must take them, for the necessity of these is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second toe.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second toe is retained you must support it, and command the patient to hold the heel away, and then do order that one should push out with the thumb, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and over the nails, and if in doing so the intestine comes out, it is not good
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an elixir and perforate the cover with a needle and stop in that herb which opens the mouth of the mother, like balm and rue and ivy and chamomile and saffron and asafoetida and rue martagon and hyssop
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the elixir, and stop that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then put in a cannula of ivy in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside until the vapor comes out to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do order that one should push out as we have said, and the second toe will be removed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	And if you remain near this care and it does not come out, then command the matron to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in almond milk, and then put that in the heel and press with that until the second toe has been found, and when that has been found, then take hold of that and gradually pull it out as much as possible so that the mother does not suffer from excessive traction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is necessary that it should be reversed towards the right and left side with facility
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it must be adjusted in the quantity of traction, for it will obey and will avoid adhesion
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, as we have already recommended the care with turning and with the elixir with herbs
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if it is not removed by all the causes which we have recommended, then you must keep in mind that no fatigue should be made in the extraction, for what comes out of it to the mouth of the mother lies in the space of the thigh, and then crystallize that in that way and apply tetraherba; for that will make that it does not stick to that for several days and that it will be dissolved and will be removed
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the patient is poor, he has a foul breath, and a bad smell in his stomach; and this leads to the disease. Then cover that he receives sub-fumigious medicines and appropriate things for him.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Indeed, the ancients already used sub-fumigation with salt and dry herbs
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	A means of an instrument with which the female is sub-fumigated due to the retention of menses and the second [menstrual] day:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Either see or feel.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And suspend the limb slender in the groin and the limb wide on the fire, and suspend the sub-fumigation on the sleeves of the fire
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that within which sub-fumigation is consumed and repeat it later
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Take care of the buttocks of the unperforated child
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The boy cries and their buttocks are not pierced, which already irritate the slender ones and oppress them
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then cover the midwife that she pierce with that said knife; and if not, pierce with that sharp needle, and keep guard that it does not touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and keep him warm until he is satisfied.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	Indeed, if you fear that he is oppressed, when you pause in the bath insert a tube for a few days, and keep it until the child wants to defecate
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And indeed the oppression of the buttocks is caused by the consolidation of plague or fistula; then cover that this consolidation is not injured, and keep it cured with the care and the plaster that we mentioned before.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment of fistulas that arise from the buttocks
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise in the lower part of the buttocks are nodular and bulky, which arise from the buttock bone or in the space of the two buttock bones
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or tumor
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is old and corrupted by the white or yellow moist humors, and some veins are penetrated by these fistulas
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are recognized by that which comes out of them through the passage and by the wind; and some physicians use the disease of egressio, and many other strong people are ejected from them by force
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And these fistulas sometimes penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the heel; and sometimes they penetrate into the hip joint and into the bone of the thigh
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And it is known that the penetrating fistula that enters the buttock and not penetrating is that you put your finger on the buttock and, when you do not see it, try to remove the bone or the flesh from the fistula when it is swollen
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Indeed, if there is swelling, then enter into that attempt to plaster or bandage around that finger that you put on the buttock, until you sit on the finger or put it on the buttock
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if neither sitting nor any other cause of egestion nor vomit nor wind comes from the bath, as we have said, then indeed it is not penetrating, and you should proceed with the treatment
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the heel, the significance of it is that it is urine from that which it comes, and prohibition of that until the area is consolidated with medical treatment
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Indeed, if it penetrates into the hip joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, the sign of it is that the finger has passed through here if it is not swollen in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the part; and that it is softened in all its parts; and that it is not of any use in that treatment, nor is it consolidated with medicine
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all of them, and the cure for them is the work and uselessness of the doctors concerning which we have spoken.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Indeed, in that one that is not penetrating and is not old, a cure with iron is expected as I have told you to recommend, and that which I have already mentioned and practiced.</start_of_turn>
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the disease has come between your hands on the two buttocks and you elevate the legs of the patient into your arms, the thighs are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and you put a finger on the plaster, or on the flesh if there is swelling in the fistula, until you see that the finger has passed through the fistula.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If she groans in pain around the belly, know that her bowels have become inflamed.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If she sits on the thumb, she has already discovered that something is penetrating; or if she sits between the thumb and the index finger or the index finger and the ring finger, then it is certainly penetrating; do not work on that, for it is not in that place that the remedy is to be sought, just as we have said.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But I say to you that this is not a healthy man in this house.</end_of_turn>
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the medicine for which there is hope of benefit in them is that you burn a pointed cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as it is said before, and introduce that flame into the fistula until it reaches around the belly; and then repeat that twice or thrice until you know that all those inflamed tissues that seemed like feathers of a sparrow have been absorbed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And take care that the clothes wrapped around the belly are removed so that all those tissues that have been absorbed are removed, and take care that the medicine that causes inflammation and consolidation is applied, and if it is healed, well and good; but if not, it is not healed at any other time by any other treatment.</end_of_turn
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the thumb enters and does not penetrate inside the thumb, which is at the hip, and between that and the thumb which is very well known for its flesh or for its fat, and sometimes the fistula comes out on the surface of the heel, then dry the heel from the beginning of the fistula, and see that the thumb is dry, and that the fistula is empty until the edge of the thumb reaches the point where the extremity of the thumb was, and the thumb is freed and discharged.</end_of_turn
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And finally remove those inflamed tissues which are like feathers of a sparrow and do not remain from any other cause.</end_of_turn>
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is discharge of pus sometimes that comes between you and your operation when you burn those tissues, know that it is better that you burn the fire or acute medicine, because the burn of the fire adjusts well to these good tissues: this is the treatment of those tissues that have been adjusted, and the excision of the pus excess of humidity.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And take care that the clothes wrapped around the border or in the cause of distress are removed until the limb gets tight, and take care that the time the wound is left open is when the flesh is hard and inflamed.</end_of_turn
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines in which there is stypticism and excision; when the time is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear repetition.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already gone inside the groin and is elongated from its surface of the body, then enter the thumb in the groin and inquire about that.</end_of_turn
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you are certain that the thumb and between you and it is very well known for its fat or for its flesh, and that it is likely to penetrate, then it is not an operation in them but according to the way of faith and hope.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer in them one of three ways: either that you burn it as we have said; or that you extract it so that you can achieve the concavity of the limb so that you can easily insert the fingers and the cure will proceed; do not proceed with the incision except for the purpose of removing the lacteals that contain the belly, and that you order the patient to rest and abstain from any voluntary movement; or that you lengthen the thumb and say that pus that you dry from inside the groin is extracted from there; as we have said, or with the thumb or another sharp instrument, and that you modify those inflamed tissues which are in the incision so that they are not left crusting over; and that you try to restore the entire wound with the incision, and if the discharge of pus does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the groin, and if there is still pus left in the wound, do not fear for the patient.</end_of_turn>
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the thumb into the fistula, and it is at the groin around the surface of the body at the heel and in the margin of the groin, the thumb tries to perforate the extremity, which is just as if you were preparing the skin in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	... and insert the thumb into that fold of fat or around those; and then insert the thumb firmly into the fistula until you achieve the concavity of the limb.</end_of_turn
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates in the margin of the groin it is better to extract the fat from that hole while you insert the thumb in the groin; extract the limb of the fat and adjust the two limbs well, and rest each one, and keep it quiet for a day or two, and when the thumb has subsided from the flesh, open the wound again until those tissues that were between the two extremities of the thumb have subsided.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And quickly treat the plague while it is still fresh and healing.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Even if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, it is necessary to penetrate nevertheless, in whatever way you are prepared, for it is not for you to leave it unclosed, because that would cause infection; and quickly treat the plague while it is still fresh and healing.</end_of_turn>
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of scraping that you must use to open the fistula: the curvature of which is not acute and the other part is not blunt, so that you do not cause infection, even as is sometimes the case.</end_of_turn
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of wounds in which the silk runs smoothly over the incision.</end_of_turn
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Wounds are of two kinds, either those that are between the buttocks like coals, or those that are like seeds of grass.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And these are either small or large; and they all heal from these wounds and there is one, and not many, and not too few, and neither too many.</end_of_turn
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But indeed those that are outside the buttocks must be treated according to the months of little humidity, such as citrine water or a little of saffron with continuous application, and according to the color of the wound.</end_of_turn
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the care of that which is inside the wound is that you command the patient to relax and express themselves until the wound heals and the swellings disappear.</end_of_turn>
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you must hold me close and suspend your thumbs or that you hold them at your nail, and quickly apply these things to the wound.</end_of_turn
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if your thumbs do not hold them in those places because of the humidity of their moisture and softening of those things, then take them rough or rough and soft or wet with wool, extract them from the wound and quickly apply these things to the wound. Powder over them some fine ashes or dust near the incision, so that they go into those rather than leaving them outside; or cauterize them as it is said above.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And quickly treat these as with other treatments until they are healed.</end_of_turn
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey evacuation, it is necessary to criticize the patient with slight biting in the place where there is little pain, and wash it with the water that is in the wound and that evacuates willingly when the patient expresses themselves.</end_of_turn
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the wounds are outside the buttocks, the cause of them is light, and it is that you hold these things at your nail, or that you hold them with a thumb, and insert them, and quickly treat these as we have said until they are healed.</end_of_turn
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever desires to make an incision, cover that you administer the suture in this manner: take fine silk and enter it with a needle and quickly extract the swellings from the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle at the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the silk in the place beyond the needle, and stretch the wound strongly; and quickly tie the knot and extract the needle.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do all of this, and leave them one and do not close them, so that the excess of healing may run from that.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And quickly place over the buttocks some soft fat soaked in olive oil or in beeswax; and place that over the wound and command the patient to rest.</end_of_turn
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And quickly remove that which is outside; and when it is necessary, treat these as with ointment or another treatment until they are healed.</end_of_turn
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Neither too many wounds caused by excision of the wound or by restriction of nature.</end_of_turn
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And as they are ancient and have no value in that medicine, it is necessary to hold these things at the point of scraping or at your nail until they are moist and be host to those pus that are discharged, which prevent them from solidifying; and quickly treat these until they are solidified.</end_of_turn
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And quickly keep these things in proportion more vehement than the first time until they are almost healed and are excoriated; and quickly treat these until they are healed.</end_of_turn
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of boils, that is key.</end_of_turn
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You must know that to lance is key, and do not notice redon according to the color of the wound resembling a cap of cauliflower, and is useful in all parts and especially in the parts below the knee and the buttocks, and because of those pains you must support them.</end_of_turn
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And thus we cover that which is in the circuit of the knee, and that which is held by the nails or with a clamp, and that which is eradicated from its root; and then we care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize as follows: as is before in the head of the foot.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More than a wart is a small rough fistule round about on the surface of the body, and spots that come out like veins are seen in the feet of most children.</start_of_turn>
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And their care is that you extend and inscribe that, or that you break that with a needle or with the point of a knife inside the box.</start_of_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.</start_of_turn
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus they are eradicated backwards and forwards with the instrument which I have mentioned.</start_of_turn
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More like a flea is a small foul-smelling or fistulated large one about on the surface of the body running in the groin, and when it is cold it finds that which is cent in it like the biting of a flea, and it is beneficial around the body.</start_of_turn
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And their care is that you take a needle of goose quill or of turtle quill, and that it be strong, and place that upon the flea inside which it contains the circle of the needle of the parts of it; and then turn your hand over the needle until you have inscribed that which is in the circuit of the flea, and stop that in the groin of the body, and evacuate the flea from its root.</start_of_turn
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do that with a needle of ivory or iron in this way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The tip of the needle should be grasped by its substance, deaf (so that it is not perforated), covered so that over the thumb the learning of the hand is obliterated and the revolution of that.</start_of_turn
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the flea as it is said before in the cauterization of other ailments in the head of the cautery.</start_of_turn
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments which are administered to give credence.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some veins are beneficial credence of silver or lead or ivory or malleable; and some veins are beneficial of those small and large instruments according to those which are administered, for whoever is administered in the care of the little children is small; and of those of whom the buttocks are frail or painful, their credence of those should be small.</start_of_turn
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of great and little credence:</start_of_turn
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle in which the bundle is bound is wide according to this manner; and let there be a distinction at the place where the bundle is bound thus as many times.</start_of_turn
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it that is behind, which is included in the buttocks, is deaf (so that it is not pierced) like a lion, backwards against substance; and on one of the sides of it are two veins, and on the other side one vein, and the breadth of the vein according to the greatness of the rays and the greater the small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bundle be in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin are placed, and the root of it be a palm.</start_of_turn
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced by four veins thus as it is revolved; and if the space that is between the veins is the thickness of the finger.</start_of_turn
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And thus enter into those veins firmly with a strong thread or thread; and adjust that with that the bundle is held; and when it is placed in it the bundle is stretched in the head of the credence between two distinguished persons with strong constraint, and let you cauterize each vein: More the quality of cauterizing that you fill the bundle with medicine, that is, scald it according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too cold nor too hot.</start_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And thus the patient lies on the two hips, and raises their limbs in their beds and puts one hand over the one which already has men or a cushion; and let you anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with an egg of alum or with mucus of fennel or of something similar; and let you enter that into the buttocks with ease, and let the minister hold the bundle and express that outwards twice as much as inwards until it is evacuated in the belly all that is in the credence; and then take out the credence and the patient takes their limbs to the wall.</start_of_turn
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces this to happen, have as much as you can; and if he sleeps like that for the whole night, it is better in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May it be that even if you criticize him for his belly and his eyes, the hour you iter [treat] him, his pain will depart when he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the groin you see swelling or abscesses of lead, the hour is that the critic is mild and like a lion, for the critics with whom the children are accustomed.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de las plaguas.	Concerning the care of plagues.</end_of_turn>
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the care of the plagues that it is proper for the free man, and I say the care of those who are with me and medicines according to the compliment.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to the humors that cause the plagues and according to the location on which the plague is cast.</end_of_turn
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which the veins become affected are various, such as a cold or heat of the foot, or incision of space or rib, or percussion with the palm of the hand, or with the fist, or with a needle, or resembling those causes.</end_of_turn
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the plagues that are in the places of the body are also like a plague that falls on the head, or the shoulder, or the foot, or the belly, or the genitals, or resembling those of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the care of some plagues so that you stop that ratiocination and rule about the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple head plagues, for the memory of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.</end_of_turn>
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when there is a simple head plague and it is not a fracture, the hour you consider: if it is due to cold or resemblance, and the codena has already been drunk only once and it is a great plague, and you fear that there will be an abscess, the hour you must cover it and apply a cephalic plaster as soon as possible; and do not delay until the swelling has gone down. Extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the medicine if there is no other prohibiting cause of frenectomy, especially if the patient who is suffering from the plague is few.</end_of_turn
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let frenectomy be on the side opposite to the affected area of the plague; and keep the patient away from food and drink and coarse food.</end_of_turn
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if from the minimum you prohibit any cause, the hour is that you should diminish the food and do not approach meat or drink.</end_of_turn
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest upon the plague, if there is an abscess caused by a burn, soak it in oil of rosemary or in wine in which it is stipped.</end_of_turn
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of an abscess caused by a burn, the hour is that you rest upon the plague, if it is recent and the air has not changed the powder which I recommend to apply immediately.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, the hour is that you rest on an enema until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the plague is great or is for incision of space or resemblance, and their lips are not adjusted for pupils, the hour is that you adjust those by suture as I recommend for the suture of them.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the plague is already discovered from the bone and is not retained but for a small ulcer, the hour is that you puncture that and apply medicine to the plague and restore the limb immediately in place of the codena, and command the patient to abstain from eating coarse foods: heads and fat and things that resemble them, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find pus in the codena and it does not adhere to the bone, the hour is that you puncture all that is putrefying and drain it out, and apply treatment to it.</end_of_turn
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood flows of healthy matter, and it is not separated by medicines, the hour is that you inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not separated, the hour is that you puncture that with a needle, or ligate that; and if necessary you cause it to bleed that which we have said do not consume, the hour is that you cauterize until the blood is separated.</end_of_turn
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, the hour is that the cause of them is light; even if you powder over them this powder, which consolidates them when the air changes them.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take olive oil one part, of blood of drago two parts, of vinegar not extinct three parts; mix them all together and grind them, and let the plague be filled with it, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it is over that which is on it, and let it be coagulated with the blood.</end_of_turn
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And thus strengthen that area with powder, and read that, and do not remove it until this has subsided, for it is not to be despised because it is not hereditary, for the medicine will not be efficacious until it has healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And thus each time make it alone with the cautery, when not in their presence they are sick and healed of their illness.</end_of_turn>
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And thus do this same operation in great plagues when you consider that it must be interrupted over those and that they are stretched, and only for recent plagues which have not altered them.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if they have been altered, and especially when it is in summer, it is not understood for the position of this powder, rather do you care for those with what we have said, namely that you place your hand over these cushions during digestion, or that you place your hand over these grains of barley with water and honey until they are digested; and do care for these with the other cure until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	However if it happens in the plague that a fracture occurs in the bones, even if it is small, then you extract what is necessary from the wound.</end_of_turn
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the cure for fractures of the head is in poison.</end_of_turn
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the bowel.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	However if the plague happens in the bowel, it is not different in medication from the plague of the head when it is simple.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	However if the nerves of the bowels are incised or an artery, it is not in their engineering but that it should be avoided medication that causes violent stypticitation, even as zinc and sage which is old and similar to them because it does not injure the nerves and counteracts that.</end_of_turn
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place your hand over any cause of coolness, for the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of them is in the brain, which is the most important of all the members.</end_of_turn
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if these must be cured by medicines that are light, even as it is caused by washing with lukewarm water, any vegetable matter softened in olive oil or not-olive oil, and boil when washed with lukewarm water and the other stones are lessened in this manner, and then moisten.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	However if the plague is great, then administer sutures, or ligate the edges of it, and do care for that with powder until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	However if the plague is depth or happens to the lower part of the body, then pierce that in the area most depressed.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	However if in the plague an artery has already been incised and there is achieved flow of healing, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary as it causes you at that moment.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	However if the spondyles of the coccyx or all of them have already been incised, and the veins of the bowel have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the coccyx with sutures over the bone of the coccyx and do not touch that; join that and reduce that to its natural figure, and strengthen that by stretching it downwards, and read that for a few days; and then care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	However if the plague has already caused pain in the bones, then pierce that; and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of those that you can from it; and whatever is not apparent, read that until the plague has subsided, and be separate and the evacuation of it be alleviated.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder over that powder which has been recommended to you.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	However if in the plague there is a fistula, then care for that with the water from which the memory will come back to you in the stomach.</end_of_turn
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the bowel or of some that remain when there is space or space between the ribs or between the shoulder blades or between the flanks or between some that remain.</end_of_turn
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of the flank or of the shoulder blade, and sometimes of its depth, then consider more if it is from the plague than from the patient’s illness; for the plague is mortal.</end_of_turn
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not depth and the plague is recent in the abdomen, then you stop in it for the first hour and do not strengthen that because it will not be retained in the depth of it and will return to the heart and worsen the illness, rather stop it at that moment and remove two vegetables a day.</end_of_turn
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the swelling is not present, then rest in the orifice of the plague coat for a while until it subsides; and make the patient sleep over the plague so that what is in them is discharged.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	Even if the plague has passed three days or more and the patient does not have spasms, seizures, convulsions or stiffness of the limbs, and sometimes other good signs of recovery, it is still necessary to take care of the plague until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	Even if recovery is excused, and the wound is already open, it is still necessary to know that the fistula has disappeared; therefore care for it at its source.</start_of_turn>
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the plague is caused by incision of space or of bone, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the thigh, then care for it with an ointment that precedes suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.</start_of_turn>
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Even if inflammation has already passed in the bone, and only pieces remain to be extracted, then twist the plague and cover to extract those pieces, if they are separated.</start_of_turn
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	Even if they are not separated, the intestines enclosed by the plague soften; therefore the extraction of them is eased.</start_of_turn
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for other plagues that happen in other parts of the body, the help for caring for them is the application of what has been said.</start_of_turn
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of belly plagues.</start_of_turn>
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that happens in the belly is either great, or little, or moderate.</start_of_turn
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	When there is a great abundance of vegetables, the belly bulges or nerves are affected because the intrusion of the intestines is excessive and the suture of them must be more violent and subtle.</start_of_turn
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A slight disturbance is easily overcome by other means; however, if the reduction is more difficult, if you do not take care of the excessive intrusion of the intestines into the abdominal cavity, which swells and engulfs them, because the tissues are already affected.</start_of_turn
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best discomfort is the moderate one, in which the reduction of the belly is not difficult, just as it is in the two previous cases.</start_of_turn
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And it is known that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, however two sutures are common that are used in the sutures of the other parts of the body.</start_of_turn
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other sutures are specific to the belly, however they are only specific to the suture of the belly.</start_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend that you provide any exposure and declaration.</start_of_turn
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is slight and there is any cause of the belly for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, there are two ways: either by the smallness of the disturbance as we have said, or because the belly is affected by cold air.</start_of_turn
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore, when it is like this, cover that with a towel that you soak in warm water alone, or that you squeeze out water from, and apply chamomile, mint, pepper, and cloves to that area until the inflammation has subsided.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some vegetables make the water in which they have been steeped sticky, and it is better than plain water for resolving the inflammation.</start_of_turn
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore, when the inflammation has subsided, it is necessary to moisten the belly with water in which it is immersed and well-covered, because by this means the tissues are relieved of their excessive tension.</start_of_turn
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the tension of the tissues has already been released by this care, it is enough to make an incision with a small instrument with which the wounds are opened.</start_of_turn
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary care is better when it is appropriate, that is, that it is not excessive and does not necessitate starvation.</start_of_turn
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, if its shape:</start_of_turn
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part is sharp, the other is not sharp, and the extremity is blunt, and it should not be as blunt as a sponge, but slightly obtuse.</start_of_turn
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, when the plague is aggravated and has gone out of the belly, it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form, in its own place, if possible over water, because that is better.</start_of_turn
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	May when the disruption is wide, and is in the lower part of the belly, then you must lay the patient over the seat two, and suspend your hands further from the seat top; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must suspend the head and the feet further from the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must suspend your understanding and consideration for a while in order that the part which has the plague may be higher than the other
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer it in the great plagues and in the small plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, suspend the water that is to your preparation, and thus make it that it be administered between your greatest pains, which has the entire disruption with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and thus uncover from that to that which may cause the suture to be broken for any reason whatsoever.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture technique: that you grasp the needle, or companion of the needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and thus lay aside the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle one, or more as you do not put faith in the two extremities of the coccyx, at the two extremities of the heel which is left by the coccyx from the parts downwards, until you have penetrated that part; and you have already added two extremities of the coccyx and two extremities of the heel, so that there are four orders in all.</start_of_turn>
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And thus stretch firmly double in the circuit of the needle, and several threads of two parts together, and thus add the two lips and the plague by addition; and thus lay aside the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and thus bind that thus firmly as the first needle; and do not cease doing this until the whole contraction of the plague is complete.</start_of_turn
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And if the needles are small between fat and lean, that the fine needles do not prick them unpleasantly; and the large ones are difficult to enter the coccyx, and therefore because of this you must make them lean and fat.</start_of_turn
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And you must not make the needle stay in two extremities of the coccyx too long, for so the flesh is not pricked carelessly and the plague is opened before its consolidation.</start_of_turn
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suture for that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And thus prick the extremities of the needles so that they do not cause the patient to suffer during sleep; and you will suspend over the suture fine powder expanding from all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.</start_of_turn
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These methods of suture with needles in cold weather are more convenient in the small plagues, because with them you only need one or two needles or around them.</start_of_turn
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	More commonly, the second suture is thus: and that you administer with the suture the four extremities, of the coccyx and two extremities of the heel, in a single thread, with a needle in which be firmly enclosed engulfs lean and fat.</start_of_turn
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And thus when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that middle part from which you began, so that the thread retreats box from the swelling part towards the plague, so that the suture is as strong as the natural suture.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And suspend between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the middle finger.</start_of_turn
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture saves lives.</start_of_turn>
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And thus I cured a a man who was sick with a plague in his belly who was lying in the plague of a palm, and it was the disruption of the greatest plague of a palm, and it was seen from the intestines surrounding two palms of the belly and was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and when I had reduced that after the belly had been outside the plague for forty-eight hours.</start_of_turn
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and I cured that one and he is healthy; and thus I have seen for not more than a year, and it is spoken of in their customs.</start_of_turn
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had given up that he would not recover; and by a miracle, behold, I cured him, for in that place where no other doctor or medicine was found, I simply put on the plague coat twice a day and gave him honey water until he recovered.</start_of_turn
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I say two special methods of suture according to the narration of Paraula.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And so you begin the suture of the tendon, from the proximal part towards the distal part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, when the needle penetrates the tendon and in the middle lacerates straight and along the whole length of the limb, and leaves the end of the gut where the needle has entered; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the distal part towards the proximal part at the other extremity of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have finished making that penetrate, then make another perforation at the same level at the other extremity of the limb; and leave the gut which is in this place, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the distal part towards the proximal part.</end_of_turn>
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate thus, that the needle penetrates at the same time as the previous perforation at the place where the gut enters the limb that is at the proximal part of it.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And thus you begin from this middle side and grasp that part which is at the gut in the other side, and withdraw the needle from the tendon which has penetrated, and reduce that in that tendon and close the gut which is at the other side of this limb; and withdraw that from the tendon which is from the limb.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make two incisions and another, and make another incision almost another incision until you sew up everything according to that example.</end_of_turn>
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with sutures of skin over which you sew the gut, in such a way that you sew the gut a little incision at the part of the extremity of the tendon, and that you leave that other incision until it is complete.</end_of_turn
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of suture which we usually call Guilia, and this is of custom, is that you sew according to the manner in which many doctors sew it, in such a way that you add all parts to their proper parts so that you can make them convenient for nature; and press the limb of one part against the limb of the other part, and that is sufficient according to what I have recommended.</end_of_turn>
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you have kept the needle in the limb at your will from the proximal part, and you will make that penetrate to the distal part in that place, and leave two gut ends; and then you will reverse the needle and make that penetrate from the proximal part to the distal part in two gut ends.</end_of_turn
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And thus you will reverse those pieces and make that penetrate whatever parts from the distal part into the proximal part in two limbs other than those which are in the place.</end_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common suture of the leg, and is the suture of which there is remembrance.</end_of_turn>
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the term for Guilia.</end_of_turn>
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And I will tell you this, the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so that you enter with these into every part a thread, and begin with the needle which is most distant from you, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which sew the parts together.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of these is more difficult than that of the other parts of the belly.</end_of_turn
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	Moreover, the judgment of a plague is the judgment of the others plagues.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is that when you feel the recent plague on the skin that it has already altered that air, and reduces the swelling and closes that and supports that adequately, the hour you pause over that dusty matter.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, the hour you pause over that dust at the present time until it makes a hard stone and keeps the thread, and consolidates gut and limb; and you take care of that just as you take care of the care of the other plagues until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Moreover, if you do not have medicines at your present time, the hour you pause over that so much, because it begins to swell and wrinkle, and changes that two incisions that you give it, just as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not digest any other medicine in great quantities when the plagues are simple.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Moreover, if you fear that the plague communicates in lesions to the principal members, the hour you cover that you should immerse wool soaked in oil of treatment of good quality, or in scented oil, and leave that in the circuit of the parts which are between the armpits and leave the armpits open.</end_of_turn
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If pain or decay is felt in the buttocks or thighs, when swelling appears, it is commonly known that this is the result of a black bile that has become lodged in these areas, and especially if the swelling has spread throughout the thigh and is associated with an opening that extends inwards.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the pus which is in the large intestine is of a softer kind than that which is in the small intestine
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal the swelling which is called “gegunu” because it does not tolerate any kind of treatment; because of the great multitude of veins which are in it, and for the magnitude of the swelling, and for the subtleness of the body, and for its proximity to nerves
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Perhaps if the disease originates from a wound, it is necessary to remove the recent [growth/ulcer] as you deem appropriate in order to reduce the swelling of the belly
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Perhaps if it has already passed to the space and is already green or black, then strengthen your hand firmly over the place that is below the navel, in order that there flows out of the wound the blood which is in the veins and arteries there
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And immediately cut through that ligament, and suspend two extremities of the hand pending the part beyond the wound, in order that over you there may be relief from the traction of the wound due to the loosening of the tissue and the escape of the blood from the wound
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the wounds when they happen in the belly<end_turn>
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the belly and it is small, it is possible that it will remain contained within the abdominal cavity, in order to help that which was previously diseased in the lower belly with percussion of the hand and which was the wound of the lower part of the stomach, and the wound was old and finished with fistula, and the evacuation of its contents and the swelling.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And thus we must follow the care of the wound already described, even though we do not have confidence in the healing of the wound, but we must diligently continue until the wound is healed and the area is consolidated
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And thus we must see that the area is already consolidated, time to remove the evil which caused the accident of the disease in the lower belly; and do not let anything happen because of that evil accident and remain in your thousands of cares engaged in prayer and fasting, and pray between meals and exercise with these things.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And indeed some experienced people say that when there is a small wound in the belly, it is necessary to tie it up in this way: take a large cap; and adjust the two lips of the wound and put a finger of your hand over the two lips of the wound; so when you take hold of these and stretch your hand, you will tear off the head of the wound, which will adhere and not be dissolved
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And thus put another finger alongside the first one, and do not stop until you have put on as many fingers as there are in the whole wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And thus reduce the wound and cos it with the wound; and keep those heads annexed in the belly until the belly is healed; and do not let any discomfort arise from this
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And indeed it is possible that the belly is tied with a fine thread which is useful for the belly of the beast which is annexed to it, because it is finer; and that you grasp the extremity of these fine threads of the belly, and without tearing, and tie the extremity of it to the fine thread, encircling it, and insert that thread through the hole and cos it to that belly, and reduce that which is in the disruption
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This way of stitching with fingers is not anything but by way of hope and trust.<end_turn>
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Perhaps if the wound is great and wide, more so if it is in one of the small intestines, which is not anything but subcision, and not the healing of it altogether
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Care of worms and fistula<end_turn>
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that every wound and afterbirth when they grow old and become old, and that is useful, becomes a ulcer, and is not consolidated and always gets out of hand and is not torn off, the hour in any part of the body is universally called fistula and is called that collection of worms
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula truly is a foul, hard, white wound which does not cause pain and which is concave like the wound of a wound of pleasure; and for this reason it is called that ulcer of praise.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in such humours that the ulcer softens, which comes out of hand; and when the humidity is strong it is torn off in a few hours
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And many of these humours are soft, and little, and great, and subtle<end_turn
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And indeed I have already said in the division that whenever I speak of ulcers, know that any ulcer which is neither healthy nor unblemished is not due to anything other than one of these causes: either for want of care in the body; or through malice; or because there is hard flesh between the teeth and gums which hinders the birth of flesh; or because of some faulty diet; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter which is carried to it is of bad quality; or because the treatment is inappropriate for the cure; or when corruption is present in the area, and is pestilence; or because of the property of the region itself, as it is in Saragossa where digestion of ailments is difficult and recovery from ailments is slow by nature. Or because in it there is one bone, or more bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have already been mentioned, and the signs of these and their treatment are discussed in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I tell you the treatment for fistula, which is effective by means of surgery with my hand
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for some are fistulas that penetrate the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or the kidneys, or to any of the vertebrae, or to any of the compound joints, as with the hand and foot; and of these that give proximity to the main limb and resemblance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore of all these fistulas that are treated in this way are those of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and require work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is any fistula of which the depth does not reach these places that I have said, and you expect and confide in the cure of them, and you wish to learn of them, when you wish to attempt to remove or cut away, and if the fistula goes according to rule, then inquire about it from me
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	May be the fistula is crooked, then investigate that when you attempt to make the incision, for the elevation of the body of the limb is alleviated and curved should overcome the curvature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has not much gore, it is not in your power to signify about it when you attempt to do so
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore bless the works for their works, for the humidity by which you cleanse them goes beyond the others and runs from them
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And thus inquire cautiously, according to what method you are able to know if here are bones or nerves, and whether the curvature of the fistula is long or short, or if it is a fistula to which there are many wounds and this is over that on which all your strength, your prudence, your pains, and your invention of the pain depend because of your compression with your hand over the area, and resemblance to the signs and the accidental causes of the apostema
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes at rest, then see the treatment with confidence: and that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close to the surface or in a distant place, long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of any of the places which I have mentioned to you and told you about
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula according to what was said before in the narration of it, and stay away from that which is in that filtration and from corrupt flesh, and what is born in the wound of the flesh, or from pus and resemblance, and heal that which has entered until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May be the fistula is of great depth, and is according to rule, then cover that within the area as much as possible, and almost remove all your corrupt flesh; and give warm compresses wrapped in medicines that are acute, and insert those into the curvature of the fistula, which you have understood with the hand.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do thus with whatever herbs are within that the acute medicine has corroded all that is rotten in the curvature of the fistula from corruption
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And thus restore that which engenders healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	May be it is not healed by this, then cauterize that as we have recommended
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May be the cause of the fistula is one or more bones and is due to your certificate that, then inquire about that and dry that according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of a vein or of a nerve or of a main member as we have said
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	May be it is to your discovery and is in it any corruption and blackness, then remove that which is within that until the corruption is overcome; and then heal that which is left until it is healed
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and brings you discomfort like this as before, then you know that you have not reached the eradication of the corruption; and then you discover about it further and inquire carefully about it and the strengthening of your right hand, and restore that
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	Therefore, if he is healthy, it is well; but if not, know that the cause of this corruption is in the profound depths of the body, which has not been recognized, and to which only laying hands can be applied.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corruption is small, or if you are able to pierce it, then at that moment you pierce it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.</end_of_turn>
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there is movement of bones, then it is extremely necessary to extract all of them, and of those do not leave any cause for your strength.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Maybe there is some cause from the humors, and at the beginning there is no fear or error, but it is necessary to cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and to break the bones.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Maybe if you are not prepared to extract the bones at this moment, then pause over the ulcer until it has scabbed over, and leave that until the bones of flesh and ligaments are nearby, and keep the ulcer from solidifying, and restrain the section that you have cut in your operation.</end_of_turn>
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Thus, if you fear, pause over the joint immersed in warm olive oil, or the Egyptian unguent, or in some of the above-mentioned unguents, for when they are softened, the ligaments will be separated from the bones, and the pain will be relieved.</end_of_turn
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Maybe if it is a large bone such as a limb or a thigh, and what is corrupted is only the surface of it, then at that moment pierce that with fine forceps only as far as necessary until that black spot and corruption has disappeared, and then restore the ulcer.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Maybe if the corruption is great and has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and all that has been opened until the corruption has passed, and at that moment cure that which has solidified.</end_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you ask a man in his bed to stay with you and assist you in your operation.</end_of_turn>
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	For a young man who is approximately xxx years old, who has suffered pain in his heel, and from whose foot there is abundant discharge of bad air from the body, it is necessary to perform a large incision in the heel, because the bad air has spread throughout the body, and it is a matter of great discharge.</end_of_turn
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And thus it is necessary to extend the time of the operation due to the error of the doctors until the discharge has subsided, and to remove any remaining matter. The healing of the wound should be delayed until the limb is closed, and all the painful spots that were causing the suffering should be treated with poultices and compresses that absorb moisture and humors from the body.</end_of_turn
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus many doctors have been called in for two years, and I have not heard anything about it, until I was summoned.</end_of_turn
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the limb with the wound and the matter running from it from those orifices for a great distance; and the color of the limb was pale and yellow.</end_of_turn
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And thus I introduced the hook into one of those orifices and reached the bone.</end_of_turn
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And thus I examined all the orifices and found that they had all penetrated to the very bottom of the wound.</end_of_turn
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And thus I closed my hand and made an incision into one of those orifices until I scraped a piece of the bone, and I dressed that corruption, which was already dead and corrupted, and it was already decaying and putrefying; and a part of the wound had already penetrated the marrow.</end_of_turn
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And thus I was overcome with what was written to me and prepared for the uncovering of the bone.</end>
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I declare that it was not in the bone, but in that corruption that was exuding and that I saw, and I had already drained it.</end>
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And thus I stopped the restoration of the wound with conservative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.</end
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And thus I repeated the process and found further corruption on the bone, just as before.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And thus I saw that from that corruption there appeared to me a perforation, and I made the healing of the wound and the restoration, and it is not restored.</end
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And thus I discovered another ulcer and I continued to perforate the bone little by little, until I had perforated the restoration of the limb, and it was not restored until I had opened it up to the palm of the hand, and I extracted that with the marrow, and I restored that with medicines, and it is consolidated and healthy.</end>
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	E no is necessary iteration in the operation of them and section of them save for the disposition of the fragility of them and the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of their death, which in them proceeds at all hours by excessive evacuation without small harm.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore it is good to keep the whole body sound, and nothing is better than to take care of their spirit in the body; and it is a good thing to restore their virtue; and it is reported in their arrangements and they do not make them contradict in walking or sleeping or in any cause.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is urgent in the body already trembles, then take this way: take a piece of lint and grasp that at the end of that prominence, and command someone to stretch that out to the sides; and suspend that lint of wool thicker than the first lint; and then place that over the bone that you left behind, and stretch out the limb so that you can reach the bone to its parts, and uncover the bone over the place where you want to close it so that the wound does not hurt the bone.</end_of_turn
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And suspend a cushion or table behind the bone adequately, because when you do that it is not forbidden to cut off the corrupted bone.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And take care that the cutting be small on the corrupted part, because if it is in the cavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and force the closure of it another time.</end_of_turn>
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, bring forward a continuous part from the other, and the corruption is at the middle of the bone or in part of it, then uncover the bone throughout; and then suspend a cushion behind, and cut that from the first part where the corruption is until the closure of the other part is completed.</end_of_turn>
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the cutting be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.</end_of_turn>
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, puncture that corrupted joint, and cut the bones where it is continued from the other side.</end_of_turn>
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but engineering.</end_of_turn
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the part of the hand or foot, it is not easy; however take care that you inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and open that, and tell that according to any arrangement that is possible for you, and in case it is rectified for you, when it does not make you contradict the vein or nerve.</end_of_turn
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know what is incisions and what saws to incisions these bones are not according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the thinness and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and the rarity of those; because you must prepare for every kind of operation the appropriate instruments for that operation.</end_of_turn
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you must know that this operation means for you about the kind of instrument from which you will make use; when indeed it is great study and long and knowledge of the methods of this art, and testimony of the methods of treating diseases, which you have already had for your purpose that is convenient to them from all ailments.</end_of_turn
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will find useful and which you will experience in your prohibition which you will experiment with on the others.</end_of_turn
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:</end_of_turn>
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw.</end_of_turn
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw.</end_of_turn
Forma de ray:	Form of file.</end_of_turn
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	And the head of this file according to the shape of the star-shaped key, and the points of it according to the shape of the heel of the foot.</end_of_turn
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not suffice that at those times the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the large mouth is wide open.</end_of_turn
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of major razor than the others.</end_of_turn
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller razor.</end_of_turn
Forma de razori lat:	Form of flat razor.</end_of_turn
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw quite well: let it be arched more and the sharpness of it of iron, and the handle of it pointed downwards quite well.</end_of_turn
Forma de lu:	Form of it:</end_of_turn
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Reasoning of the kind in which it has concaved.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another reasoning of the subtle kind
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	A reasoning of another kind concerning curvature of the extremities
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	A reasoning like that of a small tentacle
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	A reasoning of the kind in which the bones are immersed
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another reasoning of the lesser kind
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	A reasoning of the kind which resembles a ray, and the extremity is like a saw, and is seen in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	A reasoning like that of a ray which is pierced by the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity is triangular and acute at the end.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is like the iron of India, and it is like covering all the causes that we have said of rasories and incisions and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extremities and the sawing of the bones
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are affected either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption for the care of those medicines and the care does not relieve it, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the limb without having perceived any cause, when in such a case you must understand that you have to cut into that limb in order that the evil should vanish because of death or malice which is more harmful to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign that this happens to the limb is that the limb is black within before it is healed that the fire has already consumed it, or that it turns black almost immediately before the blackening has passed from within that limb which you saw to be black, and therefore I order you to cut into that limb immediately
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And in the same way if the cause of the corruption is a venomous blow, such as that of a scorpion or a viper or of a bite of a worm, and the like
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to enter the hand
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And in the same way if you reach the hand, then you must cut that from the root of the bone, and do not leave space for the corruption to enter until it has passed from the bone of the arm
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	Or if you see that it is necessary, cut into the arm at the joint
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if it happens again that the corruption goes away and sometimes the limb is saved, then in that case the death of the disease is the remedy; and to give another cause or treatment in such case is useless
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And in the same way if the corruption happens in the foot when it affects the toe of the foot, then you must cut into that between two bones of the foot.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If it touches the heel of the foot, then you must cut through the whole foot
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Even if it has penetrated to the nail, then you must cut through the nail at the joint of the nail
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the nail, then in that case there is no remedy but to let the disease run its course, and leave the patient to his fate
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The manner of cutting or sawing the limb is that you grasp the ligament at the point where you wish to cut, and grasp another ligament over the area; and extend one minister to the edges, and extend another minister at the center; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without stretching too much, until the whole flesh has been discovered; and then cut or saw accordingly.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And you must prevent all movement from all parts around the area so that it does not touch the area itself, and that the patient receives an adjusted wound and gentle cautery
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Even if blood flows when working, then you cauterize the area cautiously, or suspend the bleeding by any means that can restrict the blood; and then return to your medicine until it has been completed
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And finally, tie the affected limb securely with a ligament at your convenience, and care for it until it is healed
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that you should send a man to the sickbed of the foot of the patient, because this is the way that I have seen and heard that this kind of accident has been treated with great success in other places.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption first of all appears in the foot of the toe before it affects the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And thus that man prepared himself for the pain, put more than enough salve on the part that was suffering from pain and distress, and the painful area entered the joint, and peace was restored.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time has passed since that medicine was applied to the thumb indicating that corruption
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And thus I saw that the excessive heat that had been applied to the hand of the medicine had disappeared from the body, and that the swelling began to subside in the other finger that had been placed on the hand of the medicine; and that the excessive heat did not remain, but went away to the other finger that was placed on the hand
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to prick his hand, and I did not dare to do what I was hoping to do concerning the excessive heat that I feared would cause the hand to die, for the power of the disease was great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he awoke, he returned to his place and told me that the man had prepared himself and pricked his hand entirely, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not yet finished telling you this story, except that it is a witness to what occurs in this disease, and what is its significance and for what reason it is useful
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	From the care of the physician and the quality of the plaster cast with the medicine.<end_turn>
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a fleshy limb and the space of the abscess is prolonged until the collection of pus has formed, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged, and the limb remains as before as if it were a vessel, and the cord that was under it is cut away as if it were a thread, and there is no further corruption, and it does not leave an imprint on the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called an incision, and is not named an fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption spreads to some limb, then it is called a fistula and not an incision
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is that the cord be completely cut through as if it were revolted, and more so when it is finely divided and is useful like wax, and comfort that it does not adhere to the limb by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the cord will adhere and that the corruption will not cause any further consequences, and if the cord has become soft, then in that case treat it as if it were plastered
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you must consider the nature of the wound, and if it is great, and if the limb stinks of gangrene, then you must plaster that limb with Egyptian medicine which is made of olive oil, vinegar and lead and which receives ground pearls, and which is adjusted in a vessel, and which is covered over the wound until the medicine has dried and reached its full effect.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And do the same with the other limb, dissolve it in water and honey; and plaster the limb and strengthen its bones, and leave the medicine on for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And remove that from the wound; and do this for several days until the limb is healed and the swelling is gone
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some physicians plaster with water of ashes, when it is not at your disposal this medicine; and take ashes of rue, and put them on water; and do this until you are convinced that the limb is healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the disease does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of the ashes, then you must plaster with water and honey and vinegar, and plaster with wine and honey mixed together, because the property of honey is to soften and cleanse, and the wine makes the limb adhere, and especially when there is excessive stickiness and dryness in the wine
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and you are convinced that the limb is healed, then plaster with water that makes the flesh rise in it
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take of fennel seeds and dissolve them in scented oil and vinegar; or you plaster with some medicines and add others which have the properties that I have already written in the treatise on medicines.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the bone of the limb is straight in which the needle of the plaster has not been received, then you must gradually enlarge that part of the iron with a small file, and stop when it is enveloped in Egyptian or basil ointment until it is enlarged
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the bone is wide, then you must suture the edges of the limb and leave them as long as the plaster has been added
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the bone of the limb is elevated to the armpits, then dry that part of the limb where the bone is so that the limb can pass through it, because when the limb is straightened out in the bend of the limb, the flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to drain the pus from the wound surrounding the base of the bone as you wish, then know that you must perforate it and prepare the limb for the procedure for which it is commonly used, that is, to break it off with a brace as is appropriate for your practice and without leaving any cause for suspicion.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are applied to the convenient area until you have extended them over the limb's matrix.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And take an amount of ointment such that it covers the communication of the whole limb; then apply it to the edges of the wound of the limb with a little more than the size of the wound; and extend it over the rest of the limb as much as the amount of ointment allows, and leave it on the limb for a long time so that the pressure of the brace is relieved from the limb and does not leave a mark on the limb except for a slight discoloration for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Whoever is on the limb, whom you keep for an hour, so that it heals from the pressure of the brace.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And that you may know whether the limb is broken or not, or whether the fracture is digested or not, or is not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Therefore you must consider the position of the limb, whether the patient experiences pain or not, and if there is swelling in the limb
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medicine is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material that was applied to the wound has already adhered, or if it is properly adherent, then know that you must remove the dressing or plaster for a few days, and when you remove the dressing, change the bandage for another and renew it.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if there is some slight space remaining in the limb, do not be discouraged by the adhesion of the dressing, for the healing of the limb is appropriate, for in some cases the formation of pus in the wound is delayed, and in others it is useful to break it up.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the limb has remained immobile for several days without adhering, know that the limb does not adhere; and if the adherence of the limb is delayed, this is a prolonged cause, then you must adjust in the excision of the medicines, and if the medicines are moistened in their substance and in their power, they are dry just as well as if they were powdered today, when they are adjusted in excess of their necessary addition
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most useful remedy for this is to take powdered gypsum and dissolve it in olive oil, and apply it to the limb with some ointment in its substance, and keep it warm, and use this remedy for this purpose
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And thus it is seen in this action that, when not bound, gypsum is more effective when it is ground up until it is coarse, and use it in this way; or that you take myrrh and aloes and powder them, and sprinkle them on the honey when it is cold, and apply all this over the wound and strengthen it over the limb; and do the same with the honey that you have ground up until it is coarse, and sprinkle it over the wound and strengthen it
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And many remedies of this kind are administered with long-lasting and noble herbs, such as lily of the valley (which is a lily) and centaury, and barley and chamomile, and use these simples or adjust them, crush them and sprinkle them on the honey that I have recommended; and use them
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the limb is prolonged, and it is not healing with this care, know that the corruption is in the root of the limb, and already make an inquiry in the bones or in the other parts hard or flexible, or in the ligaments; then you must care for it with fistular care, as is said above.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	From the care of swellings and nails attracted and added incision of the digit and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A swelling is a swelling that does not leave the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and is very strong in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its care is less precious, or is a post-caut embolism, or is corrupted, and the limb becomes soft until it consumes the root of the nail, and is very strong in corrupting that whole thing, and is harmful to the limb until it emits a foul odor, and the limb is pale.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have what we have said in the division and do not confirm your care, know that you must make an incision throughout the whole thickness of the nail and immediately cauterize the wound immediately so that the cautery does not do any harm in this matter.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the blood vessels of the nail are already coming out and weakening the flesh around the joints, and the pain begins to pierce and spread throughout, know that you must make a narrow incision to leave free the angle of the nail that is causing the pain, and remove that and put in its place a plaster that can burn the corrosive matters until they are all gone; and then take care of the area until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already begun in the bones, it is necessary that you insert the needle into them and extract them, for it is never healthy that they should be corrupted in them.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If sometimes corruption and decay go towards the nails, then insert the needle into one of the nails as it is opportune, and take care that it is healthy.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has undergone percussion or drawing, and there is acute pain, then immediately apply flebotomy to the patient, and dry the nail with a blunt lancet with a transverse section, and keep your hand over the area to prevent the nail from breaking.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Just as it is natural in the greater number of households, strong is the flesh, strong is the bone, or strong is the nail.</end_of_turn>
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And these are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birth of them in the nails of the fingers.</end_of_turn>
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is born in the nails of the fingers does not worsen, but that which is born in the joints is painful.</end_of_turn>
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is slight, and it is that you insert that which must have its root with a blunt edge.</end_of_turn>
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of those that are born in the root of the joint, the care is difficult; and therefore keep your hand away from the wound.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to open the nail, cover that you insert at the beginning the cavity of the nail with a circular incision within the bone, and then grasp with one of those convenient forceps, and take care that it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	If consolidation occurs among the nails between their roots or for the birth of the bone that does not go away, or for consolidation of pus or for burning of fire, or for stiffness, then cover that consolidation until the nails return to their natural shape.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And keep between their layers of lint soaked in olive oil so that they do not adhere too firmly, and separate between these, or place between these a layer of soft lead until it is consolidated as much as necessary.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	In the same way as consolidation occurs in the nails with the palm, then dry that consolidation as it is prepared and conform to the figure of the limb.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the origin of the vice, so are varices.</end_of_turn
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varices, and these are veins surrounded by thick veins filled with melencolic fluid which are found in the limbs of the body, and their greatest progress is in the veins of travelers, laborers, and porters.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary to administer purgatives of the black bile of the body several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	There are two methods of treatment for these: one is that it is given injections and that one black sand be taken away, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.</end_of_turn
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of these is as follows: at the beginning embroider the limb with cold water until the black sand is resolved, which is useful for the limb, and then tighten the limb of the patient at the part of the wound to the upper part of the ankle with a bandage, and grasp the vein in one place, or in two or three in a wide section, and elevate the black sand with the thumb of the lower part of the limb to the inside of the limb, and pull it out, until the amount you want has been expelled, which will tolerate the virtue of the wound.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And so do these things, and command them to abstain from foods that generate black bile.</end_of_turn
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment with flebotomy when the veins are engorged and when the patient feels better.</end_of_turn
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Therefore the elevation of these is as follows: raise the limb of the patient, if there is swelling in it, and grasp it in water until it becomes wrinkled and the veins are relaxed; or that it be exercised by a strong exercise, if there is no water at your disposal, until the limb is whitened.</end_of_turn
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And keep the cord bound in the root of the vein for section in the long or behind it must give the ankle, or in the bottom of it must cut off the circulation.</end_of_turn
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que veces aquela roga declinant a negror.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore when you have evacuated and opened the arm, sometimes that white stuff that was like a thread will go away.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And now put your hand over that ray that is inside until it is raised up and away from the arm, and suspend that until once or twice a lion has gone by.</start_of_turn>
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And now cut another piece and put it alongside that piece for three fingers, and then draw out the arm from below the vein until it appears.</start_of_turn
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And now elevate that and pierce that towards the little toe, and then draw out that and elevate that until it is level with the second incision, and then draw out that from the incision above that.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that until you have drawn out that from the most prominent or highest part of all the incisions, until all is healed; and then pierce that again.</start_of_turn>
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey my order to draw out and elevate, then put in a strong needle double and ligate that and draw out, or put in your hand the ray and twist your hand over all until it is bled dry.</start_of_turn>
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And take care that it is not pierced; for if it is fractured, that will be difficult to elevate that limb and will bring discomfort to the patient for that night.</start_of_turn
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that is all gone, then pause over the place of the wound and cover it with slippery ointment of wine and oil and unrefined oil, and care for that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having thorns which are surrounding the parts, and that is not in accordance with what has been said, then you must cover that wound over all the parts of the thorns and the surrounding parts, and then suspend that with a needle until that whole thing is elevated.</start_of_turn
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Take care that you do not pierce the vein or damage that, for that will make it difficult for you to elevate that; and use your prudence in that.</start_of_turn
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Describe the appearance of the wound from which the vein has been drawn out.</start_of_turn
Forma de unci orp:	Describe the appearance of the needle that was used to ligate the vein.</start_of_turn
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not acute like needles or sharp at the end so as not to damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were flexible, it would break the vein by its flexibility; having that said, it has a sufficient size for what we have said.</start_of_turn
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the vein of the thigh.</start_of_turn
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the swamps in the low countries like the Ganges in India and in the dry lands of Arabica and in the lands of India poor in vegetation and without trees.</start_of_turn
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also engendered in other parts of the body in other swamps.</start_of_turn
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the origin of it is putrefaction that comes from leaving the arm like a serpent with its head and tail in the body and with worms and beetles and worms that are engendered between the arm and the flesh.</start_of_turn
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the coming of this is that the vein bursts in the swamp with violent inflammation; and at that place is seen blood; and from that place the vein begins to withdraw from the place of that bloodstain which appears to be like a plant root.</start_of_turn
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And thus when you feel the limb, then cover that part with a plum of lead whose weight is like that of two dracs. Enter into two dracs, and notice that and leave the lead suspended from the limb.</end_of_turn
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many veins as there are for any reason outside, cover them with lead and do not neglect that.</start_of_turn
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the limb is not prolonged, then you must pierce a part of it and cover the remaining; and do not pierce that from which there is a risk of breaking the skin and causing swelling and inflammation in the place and ulcers.</start_of_turn
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it must be treated gently and be drawn out little by little, until it is completely withdrawn from behind the limb and does not leave any cause in the body.</start_of_turn
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	The vein is said to be about five palms and a thumb in length, and already I perceive that it is full to the extent of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is suspected at the time of treatment, then introduce the needle into the heel of the foot and perforate that for as long as necessary to expel all that is in the matter, and apply poultice to the area for several days with medicines; and then care for the ulcer for healing.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	The vein has many branches, especially when it approaches the ankle or the foot, and it gives rise to many small arteries.</end_of_turn>
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore care for it as we have said before concerning the division and in what we have mentioned.</end_of_turn>
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section above, worms are generated under the skin and is called bovine disease.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in every land bovine disease because it is found in cows and is very common in the groin and the buttocks, and it extends throughout the body, causing swelling and damage, and it is recognized by the patient's pain in each limb until the groin is ruptured and the intestines are expelled.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors as well as from worms and serpents and worms and lice in the belly.</end_of_turn
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and is elevated to the head, it causes vomiting and breaks the head, and what is in the intestines is expelled.</end>
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, do not do so without first restraining the patient's movement and showing him the appearance of the disease, and when you have seen that the swelling has subsided and that the pain has ceased, then dry over it and extract it.</end_of_turn>
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is pressed in the buttock and you do not see it, then place the cautery on the surface of the foot until it is dead, and the greatest cause of fear is the corruption of the bone by which the bone is corrupted as we have said.</end_of_turn
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Or if sometimes this thing comes close to the head by vomiting, then tighten over the navel with great strength, and dry over it, and extract it; and let the patient use an emetic to evacuate putrid humors, and keep away from foods that generate putrefaction.</end_of_turn>
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	The section is over the bovine disease.</end_of_turn
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that is perceived in various parts of the body, and it is usually transferred from limb to limb.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen this according to what I recommended to you.</end_of_turn
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I saw that she had swelling in the veins of her arms and I saw a small swelling in the groin of her arm, and when I stayed with her for an hour, I saw that the swelling had subsided as much as if it had never been there, as if it had never existed.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that place disappeared and the swelling remained in the muscle, and I stayed there for an hour.</end_of_turn
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And so it went away in the other parts of the body until it reached the other arm.</end_of_turn
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommended to her that she should rest throughout the body as I have seen; and I was amazed at the transformation and the speed with which the limbs changed places.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my studies according to that manner, but I have seen others who have suffered from pain when their limbs were rearranged from limb to limb.</end_of_turn
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen anything like that in the girls.</end_of_turn
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is anything but because the woman was old, and she had many wrinkles on her skin and veins exposed, and in this appearance she felt that sensation of changing limbs.</end_of_turn
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this phenomenon does not appear according to this retrograde reasoning in those who are delicate and have humors full of veins hidden under the skin.</end_of_turn
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to cure her, and she feels that pain, do not be afraid of the vomiting as we have said; tighten over that area and leave her with curiosity and dry over that until the swelling is gone, and cauterize the place.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not feel the pain in your thighs at this time, know that it is because of the excess of humors in the body, which expel air, and that the cause of these is the retention of bile pills and seeds of serapi, resembling grains of sand.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are varied according to their species, and according to the places of the body in which they are cast, because their diversity is that those which have large heads and small, concave, and soft ones are solid; and those which have three angles, and those which have tongues; and those which have handles.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and the toes in which they are cast is according to two methods: because the limbs or main limbs with cause, namely the brain, the heart, the spleen, the lung, the bones, the belly, the bladder, and the testicles, and therefore when you touch any of these limbs and it appears to you that death is imminent, which cause I recommend to you immediately, because if you do not see these symptoms, and the arrow is not buried deeply in the limb, then you must extract it and care for the wound
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And concerning the symptoms of the servant when the arrow has penetrated him, and has gone through his bowels, it is said that this happens from the swelling of the liver which is above the brain, because of the heat of the bile, and vomiting, and dizziness, and yellowing of the urine, and swelling and yellowing of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and great strength is lost of the voice, and the word is abolished and destroyed, and it is said of the place of the wound a white moisture resembling grains of sand, and that it looks like the abundance of urine.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these symptoms, then you must abstain from the care and extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the arrow has penetrated the heart, it is because of the left nipple, and it is certain that it is not a trivial cause; and great strength is seen in the movement of the arrow which is similar to the movement of a worm, and it brings forth the black plague, and if there is any coldness in the limbs, and sweating, and fainting; and therefore you know that death approaches immediately
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the arrow has hit the lung, it immediately brings forth bloodstained spumes of the plague, and the blood vessels that are above the belly become clotted, and the color of the sickness changes, and great breath is exhaled, and there is a request for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	When the arrow has penetrated the membrane which is in the feet, and there is pain, then it is because of the small bones, and it causes great pain and great swelling, and does not move a single muscle in the body
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	When the arrow has penetrated the stomach, then great strength is seen from the ongoing plague of any indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	When the arrow has penetrated the belly and is stuck there, then there is seen any wound of the plague, or the membrane, or the intestine which is broken, and there is no hope for the cure of the extraction of the arrow
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	When the arrow has penetrated the bladder, and comes out with urine, and proceeds from the bowels to the outside, and there is great pain in the abdomen, then it is known that it is fatal
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And concerning the other members as well, such as the face, the neck, the chest, the flanks, the armpits, the shoulders, the spine, the ribs, the breastbone, and the limbs, they are saved according to the greatest possibilities when the arrow does not find any vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you what I have seen of the being of these arrows, for that it signifies concerning the care of your body
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man who has been pierced by an arrow in the tear of the eye in the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, I left the gray of the eyebrow of the eye, and he was healed, and did not suffer any damage to the eye at night.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been pierced by it in the gray of the eyebrow of the eye, I left the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be recovered from him except for a small part to which it adhered to the thigh, and it was a great arrow of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no eyebrows
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And behold the Jew, and he did not suffer any damage to his thigh eye
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who had been pierced by it in the chest, and it was an Arabian arrow, and there are eyebrows to it; and when I inquired about it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the Christian's chest; and when I had become cunning with that one, I managed to extract it, and the Christian was healed
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it lodged in his navel, and I thought he would surely die from it; however, since he had passed xxx days without any change in his condition, I deduced that the arrow was no longer causing him any harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been shot twice, and consolidated was the plague upon him; however, since I had been there for a short time, I discharged the arrow from its root.</end_of_turn>
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had been shot in the belly, and the plague was consolidated within her; she had not recovered in her condition even after many days, and the woman had not suffered from any other natural ailments.</end_of_turn>
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow had been shot in the face, and the plague was consolidated; the arrow was removed, without causing him any pain, and he remained in the same condition.</end_of_turn
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the princeps of the king who had it lodged in the middle of his nose; he had already declined to the right side a little, and the arrow was completely hidden.</end_of_turn
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to the care of him shortly after the arrow was shot within three days.</end_of_turn>
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I saw that the plague of the arrow was not severe; then I asked her what was the cause of her suffering, and she did not feel it; however, she felt a tingling sensation, leaving the right side relaxed, and then I hoped that this tingling sensation was due to the extremity of the arrow.</end_of_turn
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied to her the lobe which has an astringent and digestive virtue, confident that the lobe would disappear because I saw the root of the arrow there, so that it would secrete over that.</end_of_turn
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no further significant accident occurred at the place where the arrow had been; I continued to apply the lobe to him for several days, and no accident occurred; the plague was consolidated during that time, and the patient recovered from the pain caused by the extraction of the arrow within a few days, since on the eighth day he felt the arrow no longer remained in his nose and recounted that to me.</end_of_turn
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I stopped the acute corrosive medicine for several days until I had seen enough; and when I had examined it, I saw that the extremity of the arrow had adhered to the substance.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I applied the antidote of that acute medicine until I saw the extremity of the arrow clearly; and I left it at rest for the time being until four months had passed.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the plague had become more intense, I thought it would be possible to remove the pliers from it, and I bound it; however, I did not observe any change, for the hours I did not cease to wonder and speculate about it, until one day I devised a way to remove it without pliers, as it is described at the end of the chapter, and I extracted it; and then I restored the patient.</end_of_turn>
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And many doctors say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored; I restored that as well, and the plague was consolidated, and the patient was cured of his pain entirely, and I never remembered it again for any cause.</end_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting arrows, because you must pause and explain what you do not understand from what I have said, since the parts of this art and the definitions of this are not comprehended by me from the narration or from what you are free.</end_of_turn
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the learned artisans compare little to me; and as for what is present, I find that what is absent is also present; and they find new operations and new instruments that must descend from the causes of the art when an accident occurs.</end_of_turn
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore I say that arrows are not simply extracted from the limbs in which they are embedded, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the surrounding tissue or by the contrary of the other side.</end_of_turn
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is extracted by the tissue where it is entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a cartilaginous place, is thrown out and extracted.</end_of_turn
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey this precept of the hour when the cat is struck, the hours cover that you must leave it for several days until the surrounding flesh is softened, and the attraction and evacuation of it are relieved.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not obey this precept, you must leave it for several days and repeat the attraction and movement in each day, and it will finally be extracted.</end_of_turn
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey my orders promptly, then I command that you perforate in the circuit of the vein in that limb from which the pain has departed until the limb is dilated by the vein, and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the vein is located in the bone of the forearm and has already descended into one of the veins of the brain, and appears in the patient's limb at the same time as those accidents which I have mentioned and said, then I command you to abstain from the extraction of the vein and leave it in its place until it is equal to the number of days mentioned; for if the vein recurs to the armpit, I command that you do not prolong the death unnecessarily.</end_of_turn>
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the vein is only located in the body of the bone and does not enter the armpit, and remains in the limb for several days, and no other accidents occur in the limb, then I command you to perform the traction of the vein and the traction of the limb.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	May be it is not inserted and you do not obey my order of extraction, I command you to administer supports in the circuit of the vein as we have recommended, and then care for the limb until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May be the vein is already hidden in the limb and is hidden from feeling, I command you to inquire about that sensation, and if you find that sensation, I command you to pull that sensation immediately towards those symptoms which are convenient for the traction of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you are unable about it for the constriction of the plague and for the length of the period, and here it is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then I command you to perform this over the plague until it is dilated and that the vein can be extracted.</end_of_turn
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have doubts about them which are long, then I command you to break the flesh in which it is inserted throughout all its extent; and take care of that, if you are unable to evade the flesh in the fracture of the bones and in twisting of those until you obey.</end_of_turn
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you perform the extraction of the vein in any place where it is, then use with torque of your hand and forceps at all parts until you make that obey; and take care that there is some degree of flexibility that the vein is not fractured and that it is easily extracted from its difficult traction and from that extraction.</end_of_turn
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you are unable about that of your time, then I command you to leave for several days until the parts which are in the circuit of the limb are healed, and then repeat that until the pain is relieved.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May be you do an opposite flow of blood, then I command you to administer what we have said of care in the head.</end_of_turn
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Keep your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of string, and administer with every possible ability your ability to avoid the vein; and do that with ease, tranquility, promptness and calmness as I have said and as you are commanded.</end_of_turn
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus you must contract the vein so that the limb is according to the figure according to which you must bring about the evacuation of the vein, for that is more useful.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May be that is not possible for you, then I command you to administer what is possible for you according to the figures.</end_of_turn
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May be the veins that are outside are opposite to the other side, or that already from them proceeds some part to the parts outside, or makes swelling of the extraction of the vein for the feeling of the part furthest from the bone proximate; then you must desist from that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which they grasp the forceps; and then pull that, for it is useful for the pain.</end_of_turn
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	May be it is retained in the bone, then I command you to twist the limb according to the opposite of what we have said until the vein presses on the bone, and expand it halfway, and then extract that.</end_of_turn
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or leave that for several days, and then repeat that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the pain of the vein is in that, then I command you to press that towards it.</end_of_turn
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May be the pain is acute and you want to administer an impulse, then I command you to insert it and that, if it is deaf, cause it to stumble so that between the cavity of the limb and the edge of the vein you press that.</end_of_turn
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	May be the vein is concave, then I command you to press that strongly inwards so that the vein is relieved by that.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the vein is venomous, then I command you to drain all the flesh in which it is seen, if it is possible for you, and take care of that which seems to please you.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the needle penetrates the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough to touch that area with the finger, you may safely excise that area and prevent any damage to veins or nerves, and extract that, and apply pressure if necessary, and care for that until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Method of forceps with which needles are grasped.</end_of_turn>
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like the beak of an owl, which are firm when they grasp the needle so that they do not let it go.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are various species, large, small, medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the needle and its thinness, and the extent of the wound, and the constriction of the area.</end_of_turn
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Method of applying pressure with this extremity conquishes immediately as punishment for the owl so that the passage of the needle in them is alleviated, and the thrust of that sound.</end_of_turn
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of pressing the sound of this extremity.</end_of_turn
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like that for the ray so that the passage of the needle in the curved wound is alleviated and is pressed by that.</end_of_turn
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.</end_of_turn
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which it is usually customary to perform phlebotomy are ...</start_of_turn of which in the head there are ...</start_of_turn two pulsating veins which are near the ankles, which are called the great saphenous veins; two veins that are in the two temporal bones that appear; and two veins in two tears of two holes that are called the lacrimal veins; and the vein prepared in the middle area of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two veins that are at the ear; and two veins that are in the lips; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called the palpebral veins; and there are two veins that are on the tongue.</start_of_turn
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Greater are the veins that are phlebotomized in the armpits .v.</start_of_turn Four of those are cephalic veins, and the broad one is on the outside; people call it "the head vein," and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and people call that "the vein of all the body," and basilica is a vein that is stopped in the domestic part, and is called "citellar," and they call that "the belly vein"; funis of the arm, which is stopped over the elbow, and that one in which phlebotomy is performed, and that one that appears on the palm for the sake of appearing manifest; and the ulnar, and it is the vein that is between the thumb and the little finger, and there are two branches in it.</start_of_turn
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of which is the great saphenous vein, which is on the outside of the ankle; the second is the soleal vein, which is in the outside of the thigh; and the sciatic vein, which is in the outside of the ankle; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.</start_of_turn
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The help of the veins that are near the ankles is to prevent old catarrh and emigration, swelling and old ulcers of the head that are bad for the ancient times.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding these is as you will recommend to me: that the head of the patient should be calm, and that the head of the patient should be frequent in the occipital region in the place where both veins are wide and well-lubricated; and that you strengthen the patient's neck by placing a bandage around that with which the two veins are close to the ankles in two places below the head; and that you ask the patient to hold their tongue, and if you feel the pulse of those veins ask them to hold their tongue still, here is the sign of the attempt.</start_of_turn
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the lancet that is acute, which is the inciting one, and insert it outside the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone.</start_of_turn
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand to the vein and the codena to the sides and puncture the vein at the incision point.</start_of_turn
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do as much as you wish of the antidote as you please.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And strengthen with powder and leave that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already the incision of those and their cauterization has begun.</start_of_turn
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May be two veins and arteries that are in the temples contribute to the phlegmatique exhalation of an ancient emanation and so cause bad digestion and excessive sweating of the body.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of phlegmatique exhalation of these is as follows: command the patient to eat little until the two veins appear to swell up at the surface; and when this is shown, know that their cause has been discovered; do not doubt it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then raise the edge of the coat over the vein to the armpits as I have said before; introduce phlegmatique exhalation from the inside; raise the vein upwards; and make an incision there as you would on the other veins; and do as much scraping as is necessary.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then remove the coat of the patient, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and place your hand over that coat and dust and strengthen that area so that there is strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And thus the memory of them, and the incision, and the attraction in the beginning is completed.</end_of_turn>
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore the phlegmatique exhalation of the vein of the front is similar to the phlegmatique exhalation of the cephalic vein to the ancient diseases of the face and to emigration, dropsy and fetid ulcers.</end_of_turn>
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of phlegmatique exhalation of these is as follows: command the patient to tighten their limbs with a belt until the vein appears; then take away the instrument which is called fossori of which this is the form.</end_of_turn
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture which is at the head of the fossori over that vein and puncture it either downwards or upwards in the manner of these; and leave the wound to heal according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation of the patient and strengthen that area until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Every vein is opened with phlegmatique exhalation, but it does not follow that every phlegmatique exhalation is acute; some are of the remote extremities, and some of the deep parts of the body; as for the rest, the os itself is properly and strongly protected by the surrounding tissues when phlegmatique exhalation is subtle.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The two veins that are in the temples contribute to the discharge of phlegm from the eyes for scabies of the head and dropsy in the limbs, and to the diseases of the face.</end_of_turn>
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of phlegmatique exhalation is that the patient tightens their limbs with a belt, and then phlegmatise those things, and you stand over their head.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlegmatique exhalation is useful according to the direction from the head to the feet a little bit of phlegm a little bit, for in that place it is not solid; and if the phlegmatique exhalation is subtle, the limb is strongly protected.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And do as much scraping as is necessary; and pause over those parts and strengthen them for a night, and then remove them.</end_of_turn
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The phlegmatique exhalation of the vein of the nose is associated with acute fever and violent sickness, and with the diseases of the face, emigration, dropsy which happen in the face, and especially when it is ancient.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of phlegmatique exhalation of these is that the patient tightens their limbs and puts their left hand on their nose, and takes subtle phlegmatique exhalation that remains in the middle of the head according to the rectitude, for the vein does not appear to swell up here, and the blood begins to flow freely.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It must be completed little by little and the blood must be scraped away according to your need; and leave that for a night, for that is restored with delight.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The phlegmatique exhalation of these two veins contributes to the constriction of the limbs and to the commencement of leprosy and to various diseases, swelling, inflammation, and corrosive ulcers just as in herpes.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of phlegmatique exhalation of these is that the patient tightens their limbs somewhat with their belt; and keep the instruments over the head of the patient, and let the patient sit on a cushion.</end_of_turn
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And do phlegmatise the vein gradually with wide phlegmatique exhalation; and remove the blood in small quantities according to the time or as often as is necessary; and do the same with the other vein.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And remove the belt and strengthen the two veins with slight tension so that the patient does not feel faint, and leave it like that until the plague is healed.</end_of_turn
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del otro latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Forma de fleubotomi mirti:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the condition does not manifest itself outwardly, it is necessary to lay the patient on the other side, or to change position, or to search for some limb that is painful; or to feel for the end of the limb, where the pain is most intense. And if you feel pain there, remove that part from the limb as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a lymphatic drainage of the limb, then before you tighten the bandage around the limb, place your hand over the area where the pain is most intense; and when you have found the spot, tighten the bandage around the limb as we have said. Keep your hand over the area to prevent excessive pressure.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you feel a stretching sensation in the limb, the swelling that you have detected in that area is an arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.</start_of_turn>
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	When sometimes during the lymphatic drainage, urine appears in the drainage just like the urine of a child, know that this is the urine of the artery; and that you must keep your hand still over that area for a long time; and when the urine has stopped, if the swelling persists, know that the artery has been cut, and leave that area as it is.</start_of_turn>
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Beware of the patient's urine, and do not neglect it for several days until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the artery has not been cut, and if you do not find medical assistance at this moment, if you suspect that the artery is affected, tighten the limb; the limb will become rigid and the swelling will disappear. Or take a short incision and open the area that is causing the pain, and take the pulse there until the next day.</start_of_turn
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the artery has been cut, it is useless; otherwise, take care of that part which was previously causing the swelling from which the urine escaped.</start_of_turn
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The amputation of the artery is difficult in most cases due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of damaging the limb.</start_of_turn
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, the lymphatic drainage is more useful in extracting the artery from the upper part of the limb up to the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches from the basilica and branches from the cephalic artery, as we have said.</start_of_turn
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Beware of any excessive tension in the lymphatic drainage, because that can be a nerve; and if you puncture the lymphatic drainage and damage the nerve, you will cause it to become numb, and it will be difficult for it to heal. And if the nerve is completely severed, it will not recover at all. In this case, if you see that the nerve is hidden under fat, do not open the lymphatic drainage too deeply, and avoid damaging the nerve.</start_of_turn
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the artery is between two nerves, then cut the artery in its entirety.</start_of_turn
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The usefulness of the lymphatic drainage of the cephalic artery is that it extracts the artery from the head and alleviates the pain of the heel.</start_of_turn
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Take care of this in the same way, if you want the puncture of the lymphatic drainage to be carried out over the olive or myrtle area; for this is the best way to avoid damaging the artery or nerve.</start_of_turn
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must always keep in mind that when you perform the lymphatic drainage you must not puncture the skin of the limb only, but rather seek the most painful area, and do not neglect it, until you have identified it by percussion at the first touch.</start_of_turn
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	It is often observed in fools, when not detected at first percussion, even though they are present.</start_of_turn
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Beware of the quality of the lymphatic drainage in these cases and of the accidents that may occur, in which you must consider their rectification.</start_of_turn
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that lymphatic drainage should only be performed when there is a possibility of saving the limb and preventing the occurrence of other diseases, and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, at the end of summer and in the autumn, when there is an apparent accumulation of liquid.</start_of_turn
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	It should be performed three days before or on the first day after sunset, when three hours have passed since sunrise.</start_of_turn
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When lymphatic drainage is performed, it should not cause discomfort or pain, either at night or during the day.</start_of_turn
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It should not be repeated within fourteen years, and a woman should not be drained more frequently than once every seven months, and old people should not be drained at all.</start_of_turn
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be flebotomized for any reason, let him modify the belly bulges before the flebotomy at the groin, if there is retained wound there, so that the veins do not pull out the superabundance in the groin of the belly, which are pushed, and that they do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Do not flebotomize the patients rashly, neither on account of nausea or vomiting, nor to escape from sickness or drunkenness, except when the former has passed from their body, neither from malaria, nor from any other cause that might dissolve their virtue, or body or animal
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully in the subtle art of humors whether, if it is possible, the sickness can be overcome with food and drink, or with medicines.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into the bath if any cause does not prohibit, or exert themselves with any exercise so that the sickness is made discreet
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And suspend the flebotomy of them in the feet of day, so that it is around the third hour, as we have said
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Command that the feet of that person be protected on that day from all accidental injuries, animals or otherwise, such as worry, anger, fear, and all bodily troubles, such as work, excessive drinking, and vice, and everything that may be harmful to them
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And with regard to their ailments, let the causes be present in their use according to what is customary among men with aromaticness and odor, and with balsam and the like according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the flebotomist with a cushion that is thicker than the cushion of that one who must be flebotomized
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And remove their arms, and cool that with his hand the flebotomist gives two or three compressions; and tighten the bandage with a cord and cover that with two compressions.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the restraint be temperate, for the restraint that is too tight or too loose prevents the flow of the blood; or let it be too soft, and the hours prevent the body of the patient from being relaxed
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the restraint is complete, let that one who must be flebotomized cool their hands between their thighs until the veins are swollen, and let them be declared by the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the flebotomist take hold of the flesh to be flebotomized with a little oil beforehand; and let him indicate with his left hand that vein, leaving the area where the flebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is calm because it is the vein that has been struck by the cord in the flebotomy, and from those is that it is filled with air and when you stop the flebotomy over that is contracted by the flebotomy, and is discovered by the flebotomist; and the flebotomy does not open the vein, and if it does open, that is stricture.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for this reason let the flebotomist be restrained and be solicitous in all these matters
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if the vein is torn in one compression, the hours are not; and if so, repeat that until that place is left a little, or over it is fasted, if that place is not relaxed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if that place is relaxed, or the sickness disappears, let the hours leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for it will cause excessive swelling, or do not enter the bath
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the flebotomy if necessary
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the blood recovers well, and you fear that the quantity you desire will not be achieved, the hours repeat the flebotomy in that place according to custom and adjust in the opening a little, and do what is called festination until that place is relaxed, for that place is relaxed in many men because of little opening
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	However, sometimes that is relaxed, the hours do not repeat it, for that is not useful to you in any way; and pause on that every part of the wound of oil, for that relieves the body of the patient.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place with oil than with the others oils<end_turn>
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly administer oil to the wound in all flebotomies where the veins are prohibited from the body of the patient, and make it thick and slimy when it is stopped from one of those over that place, for the blood is subtle and is upset when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if there is generated in the place of the flebotomy great swelling, that many veins have happened, especially if it has not bled until that vein, or in the small opening of the vein, and the hours cover that, and pause on that place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly bruised, and tighten that for an hour, for that is dissolved
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	The blood supply to that limb should be strengthened by means of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If it remains in the place for several days, any blackening or greenness will not be noticed; if you wish, cease from that cause of allurement and look at the dissolved mucus, or any cause of thick bile or yellow bile or something similar to these.</end_of_turn>
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Move cautiously so as not to cause haematoma or swelling, and evacuate abscesses and swellings by means of incisions.</end_of_turn>
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore place your hand over that, and if you find it to be soft, put your compression over that; for that swelling is harmful and bad. And so keep that you have stopped any cause of that which we have said, because strong blood flows from the great artery.</end_of_turn
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply pressure with that which is astringent, so that the place be hardened, and then take care of that which is left of the other cure until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And extract from the limb according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the vein leaving over the limb as much as appears.</end_of_turn
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the limb is black, then leave it to become white; in the same way if you see it thick, leave it to become thin; and in the same way if it is acute, leave it until the acuteness has passed.</end_of_turn
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for him who is full and strong who has need of an extraction of a limb at once, let the incisions of the vein be multiplied and let the incisions be large.</end_of_turn
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in him who is pale, do the opposite of that, and extract that limb gradually, and let the wound be straight.</end_of_turn
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing in the incisions of the vein is that they be transverse, not punctured.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of incision is saved from the outflow of blood and from the injury of nerves, and is more pleasant and more safe than the incisions according to breadth and length.</end_of_turn
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is customary to happen without fainting, do the incisions, and take care of that before the incisions with a little bit of bread soaked in wine instead of a thousand grains or of coarse salt; and extract from the limb three times or four.</end_of_turn
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is cold congestion, before making the incisions, give an infusion of marigold or of honey scented with spices such as cinnamon, ginger or something similar, or in aromatic and fragrant vinegar.</end_of_turn
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting happens, do the incisions, and this is a cause of the lack of blood, then take care that you precede in drinking cold water and fragrant vinegar; and use aromatic herbs and let the patient lie down on that side.</end_of_turn
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes which we have said in the division on fainting for evacuation.</end_of_turn
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to make the limb swell and dissolve the blood according to the season, take care of the incisions from which the evacuation is for, and the virtue of them is cold, which evacuates the blood gradually, as much as according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.</end>
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Whoever wants to make the limb swell and keep the blood according to the seasons, and the body is strong, then make the incision close to seven or eight hours from the first incision.</end>
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Whoever wants to remove the limb from the body contrary to the side which it descends, take care that it is done on the second or third day.</end
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Whoever in the limb in which there is no blood already scalfatised and is acute and causes fever, take care that the blood is evacuated from it in one incision and that a great quantity is evacuated and that the opening is increased until fainting does not happen, for you have preserved all the conditions of the incision; and place your hand over the patient's side, for you must not cause death in place of fainting, for the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.</end
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not take care when you want to evacuate the limb according to the season, as the orifice of the vein is closed and the blood is difficult to withdraw, for you must precede with that which has been said above and make it extend outwards, for that is too bad.</end
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it lying until it is bled according to the method; or remain with the acute pain of the phlebotomy which is clotting of the blood in the vein; or stop on that of tyriaca alum or of alum of sage, and compress that which is light pressure until the blood is outside and sitting.</end
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is clotted, leave it alone and do not touch it until the clot has dissolved.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary to evacuate the wound according to the circumstances, and it is not excused, then leave the wound open on that part or in the other limb in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	When the vein called "funis del bras" is swollen in the place of fat or muscle, when it is not obstructed or hidden, that is composed of those things
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the swelling of the limb is that the patient puts their hand in cold water until the heat has gone down and the vein becomes clearly visible
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And do the same with the strong thread over that limb and the stricture of the midriff; and do the swelling according to the small transverse, not latitudinally or along the length
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the opening wide and do the swelling with the one with which you are swelling that over the wrist a little bit
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If it is prohibited to flow from the wound, then leave the hand in cold water and let the wound run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Even if it were summer days, you are excused from the immersion of the hand in cold water, and the body of the wound is left immersed in cold water at the time of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The swelling of this vein is more beneficial than all the others, because it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerves
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The swelling of the heel of the hand is related to the ailments of the feet.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the swelling of the limb is that you strengthen the hand with the thread or with the hand, because you have put it in cold water, until the vein is swollen and is clearly visible at the same time; and do the swelling that way; and if you put it in that way it will not cause any damage to it
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Beware that you do not touch the swelling, because it leaves the nerves of the fingers naked of flesh
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And do the same with the hand in cold water and let the wound run in that, because if you do not do the hand in cold water, the wound will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the wound is extracted according to the quantity of need, then leave your hand over the vein oil and salt, so that it is not solidified too much; and keep it covered so that your hand does not stick to everything
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Indeed, the swelling of the left hand is related to the ailments of the belly
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with the swelling of this vein as you did in the other one
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The benefit of the swelling of the vein of the heel is for the ailments that are in the lower parts of the body, such as ailments of the belly, and also ailments of the major limbs, and retention of menstruation, and ailments of the tonsils, ulcers of cavities and ancient wounds, and those that remain of ancient ailments
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the swelling of the limb is that the patient puts their whole foot in cold water and makes over that friction until the veins become visible; and they put their hand over the ankle and over the foot so that the area of the vein becomes visible at the same time.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore do the swelling as widely as possible or leave the limb uncovered over the ankle so that the swelling does not adhere to it, because that is better and more salt
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you swell that part of the foot, then leave your hand over the nerves that are left over that part of the foot, and leave the swelling that you make to pass over that which is as if you were going to prick it
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so be it.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if it is prohibited to remove the wound; then leave the foot in cold water and let the wound run in that until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the person responsible for the swelling does an error in the first attempt, then do the swelling again a little while later, because the area is salt; and do not be afraid of it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same with the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	As for the sciatic vein, the place where we said is over the heel of the foot.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The assistance of the flebotomy of the patient is that of an anchor when it is for the healing of the cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy of the patient is that the patient's pain is banished, and that it tightens and strengthens the patient's belly from the groin to the heel of the foot, as far as a long strip of silk that does not appear except for this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, do the flebotomy according to each case as you are able and according to the traverse, and that is better; or insert it by incision or remove it by excision, because the location of the wound is salt
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most homes not known; and if you find it, and it does not appear with sensation, then do the flebotomy of some limb of it, and that is the one that appears in the two of the foot between the great toe and the little toe
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And keep away from nerves, and make run the healing of the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then remove the tension and place over the location of the flebotomy the coto and strengthen the location, because it is cured with delight.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the winds and qualities to use of these.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The winds are of barley, or of hemp, or of ivy.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the winds are beneficial in two ways: one is by sacrifice and extraction of healing, and the other is by wound dressing
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wound dressing that is by sacrifice is done in two ways, for it is either fire or oil
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the winds that are administered by sacrifice and extraction of healing are fourteen parts of the body, of which one in which the winds are stopped is the ankle; and the fourth part of the head; and the two parts of the collarbone; and the winds of the chin leave the mandible below the mouth; and the winds of two spatulas; and the winds of alohoster, and is over the heel of the foot; and the winds of two flames; and those of two bras; and the winds of two cavities; and the winds of two cushions
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the winds do not extract the healing except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this they do not take away the power of these; just as in the case of flebotomy; nor does it suffice that the winds be beneficial with fire or oil in any disease that is not suitable for emptying until all the parts of the body are evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Maybe if necessary, we should provoke the winds for illness or for maintenance, let us administer them at the beginning and at the end of the month, and in the middle of the month and whenever necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in some people the healing is multiplied before digestion of its extraction by the winds and they find in the belly head great heat and bitterness; and of those that they find replacement and mucus in the face and in the belly head, and in the belly collarbone; and of those that they find itching in the face and in the front of the head, and darkness and dizziness in the knees; and of those that have the location of their wound exposed; and of those that their laughter is multiplied; and of those that have a taste of healing in their mouth, or that the tongue is swollen and vomiting healing; and of those that their sleep is multiplied, and of those that see healing in sleep, mucus and old things and spots and other causes that remain to them
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore whenever in any case of these, and properly if it is in the third or half of the month, we command that the winds be beneficial more than they have passed for two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the assistance of the winds of the neck is that when they confer to gravity in the head and to what is effaced to the knees; more than that it is that it should be a close evacuation of all the body parts
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this wind is in the place of the cephalic flebotomy
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not lawful for anyone who is of sluggish temperament or in whom there is congestion, because it gives great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this it does not suffice that these things be used in the old people, and in the heads of those in whom there are fiery diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More to that, whoever continues to do this about it is beneficial oblivion; and for this you must command the wind-healer to stop his hand a little with the wind towards the heels, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And the winds of alkehel are in the place of the flebotomy of the jugular and basilica veins: and for this they confer to asthma, and to constriction of bile and to the scissura of the bile spasm, and to cough, and to replacement
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The air must be slightly warm and dry, for if it is too still, it produces weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The air movement from ambergdahan brings relief to head and eye pain, and also expels wind, fever, and toothaches; this is better than applying blistering plaster.</end_of_turn>
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And let the wind blower know that he must not put his hand too close to the scarification, for he might obstruct the artery and cause blood flow to cease.</end_of_turn>
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The dry air helps to soothe hiccups in the throat, corruption of the gums, and the sensation of disease in the mouth, and is better than applying an ointment for food that is in the armpits.</end_of_turn
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Better is the dry air that is useful on the armpits, for it brings relief from chills.</end_of_turn>
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The air coming from the armpits towards the head brings relief to the three veins, that is the basilica, jugular and cephalic, for all the smaller veins that are in the flesh depend on these three veins.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the wind blower not to proceed too far in the scarification, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave the nerves and arteries exposed.</end_of_turn
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	The air is one that has been blown over ash and brings relief to the swellings of the heel and the ulcers that are left behind.</end_of_turn>
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And let the wind blower be a strong wind, and that it be of the east, for the area cannot endure a strong dry wind; and let the wound be made with a sharp scarifier.</end_of_turn
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The greatest winds from the lower parts of the body manifest minimally, for they take away all the blood of the body, and bring relief to ancient pains of the lungs and belly, and of the bladder; and they cause menstruation, and bring relief to swelling and swelling of the abscesses.</end_of_turn
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they do not benefit the whole body and cause nausea in many people.</end_of_turn
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the drying winds bring relief for the most part thanks to the drying winds of the lower parts of the body.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the winds is that it stops the wind at the beginning of the treatment and lets it subside slowly, and does not prolong the position of the winds, but rather suspends them for a while, and lets the humors reach the area immediately for healing.</end>
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop until you see the area already bruised and swollen and that the redness of the blood appears.</end_of_turn
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you have finished scarifying and have repeated the suctions a few times, then consider the condition of the body.</end_of_turn
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the person who has soft and delicate flesh, command that you make a slight scarification and do not proceed too far, for the area should not be ulcerated.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wind blower to widen the scarification and let out a little air, and to do the suctions easily.</end_of_turn
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If there is thickness in the wound, then command that you make two slight incisions, for in the first incision you open the passage of the subtiliation to the blood and the moisture of the wound.</end_of_turn
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second incision the acquisition of the extraction of the thick blood.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is not bloody, then command that you make the third incision for the purpose of achieving the blood.</end_of_turn
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when you want to extract the blood a little at a time or a little, suffice with a slight scarification.</end_of_turn
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you want to extract a lot of blood, make a large scarification; and if you know that the blood is thick, then command that you make a wide scarification.</end_of_turn
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The end of the scarification is only the depth of the puncture.</end_of_turn
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person from whom the puncture is to be made has large, hard, dry, and rough flesh, command that the area around the wound be lubricated with softer substances; if it is in summer, thus with olive oil of aloes or violets, or almond oil, or poppy seed oil; and if it is in winter, then olive oil of marjoram, or oil of lily, or chamomile oil, or saffron oil.</end_of_turn
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is great, cold, the hour suggests either ammonia, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloes, or oil of anethi, and so on.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the windward side is of great extent of tender rind, the hour advises that oil should not be used, and that at these locations the winds of the area should be washed away with water or cold water of the sun, or with vinegar, or with lime juice, or with vinegar of boric acid, and so on.</end_of_turn>
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And concerning that of which it is said that there is moisture, wash away its winds with wine vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and mastic and so on.</end_of_turn>
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And concerning that of which the excess is great, wash away its winds with wine vinegar, or with juice of elderberry, which is greater, or with decoction of anethi, or of chamomile, and so on.</end_of_turn>
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the windward side should be protected from the bath; having said that, it should be administered at a distance of an hour or two from the bath, and that it should be placed over the windward side.</end_of_turn>
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the windward side recover from phlebotomy before the ventosation?</end_turn>
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the windward side or that from which the phlebotomy is being done is bilious and vents over it is acute and inflamed, the hour advises that you should anticipate cold causes, thus as many as a thousand vinegar and urine, and barley, and rosemary, and thyme, and so on.</end_turn
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And suspend their diet thus as poultry, and boiled meats of fish, and dishes seasoned with vinegar, and so on.</end_turn
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And concerning that of which the complexion is cold, it is necessary to anticipate the use of warm baths, or bath of aloe seeds and mastic, and chamomile, and fragrant vinegar; and that it be recommended to take little wine and to eat little, and to abstain from poultry and meat and fish and peas and mushrooms.</end_turn
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that in the day of the windward side and of the phlebotomy, the wine should be greater than the food.</end_turn
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that in a certain number of hours after dinner, at breakfast or other meals, some strong medicine such as musk, or marjoram, or alum before the windward side or before the phlebotomy or at the same time, so that the principal limbs are comforted and that the body is soothed; and do not take any baths.</end_turn
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	If the winds that are being sacrificed are to be great, let them be winds that cover the heel and the ankle, and the navel, in the places of the joints, and the armpit of the armpits, so that these members do not suffer from sacrifice upon them.</end_turn
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for these except for the attraction of the sanctity of a limb, thus as it stops the wind over the breast in the disease of flux of blood from the breast; and use this for that so that the cold wind be dissolved from the limb, thus as over the belly and the navel; for that will soften the limb and heal the wound that the wind causes.</end_turn
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And so it is stopped over the joints when it coincides with their boiling or putrefaction, for by the attraction of a strong heat they consume the boiling and expel the pus from its place.</end_turn
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And in the same way it is done when it is stopped over the heel and the ankle, you must remove the wind from those enclosed spaces.</end_turn
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These winds are administered cold with vinegar only; and some vegetables are administered with fire.</end_turn
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some vegetables are administered full of cold water in the diseases of the breast.</end_turn
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the wind should be full and greater, so it is cold water alone or water in which herbs are boiled as is convenient.</end_turn
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wind administered with fire: the breadth of the orifice of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of resin is that of a palm; and be on the side of the limb, in the place that is in the circuit, the palm of the limb, the thumb is small according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.</end_turn
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Whether it is fat of marrow or citrus, of orange peel, lion, ivy or viper for that it does not freeze the limb from its position on it.</end_turn
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it make a transverse incision of marrow or iron, where a candle is placed with the fire.</end_turn
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And indeed this great wind is more potent than the one we recommended; and the little rest that remains according to the illnesses and the condition of the patient who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of the elderly and those that stretch out are greater than those of the young and robust people.</end_of_turn>
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this wind is that you extend the flame over the limb by means of a decent amount of resin, and place that over the middle of the transverse arch of the foot, where the wind is, so that the flame is kindled around the outside so that it does not burn the body of the patient.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And indeed keep your hand over the limb of the patient, and say what we have said, because when they have the wind and do not demand that we say it, and when the vapor escapes from that wound, the wind becomes so dissipated.</end_of_turn
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And do the same with the flame according to its manner, and repeat that if you do not desire it.</end_of_turn>
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the wind that is administered in the disease of gout, with water, in which there is neither transverse arch nor wound, and which is not administered except when it is full of water, and is kept only over the limb.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its way: And this wind, the greater it is, the better, because it receives a great quantity of water.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xcvii.	The text ends here.</start_of_turn>
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in all limbs but in the limbs in which it is not possible to place a wind, because of their small size, as well as with the thumb and little finger; or in a limb devoid of flesh, as it is said of the nose and ear, and in such a case.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those which you have found bloodletting in the deep veins of the buttocks is that they are in muddy waters.</end_of_turn
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And indeed they are left lying down day and night in muddy water until they become faint; and that no other cause remains in their belly; and that you evacuate the body in the beginning with a purge and with winds; and that you cool the limb of the patient until it turns red; and that you keep them stopped.</end_of_turn
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And as they are full and lazy.</start_of_turn
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the area with the wind, it is better behind in usefulness.</start_of_turn
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then indeed wash the area with warm vinegar and add some powder; and wet and wring out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the treatment is prolonged, indeed put on a sponge of lead in cold water, and keep that over until the discharge has stopped.</start_of_turn
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the disease is multiplied, indeed sprinkle over them powdered vitriol, or urine and remain with them from the restrictive causes until the disease is cured; or keep them stopped over the area the mastiles of scraped saffron, and keep them there until the saffron adheres to the area, and the disease is cured.</end_of_turn
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And so, if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible change them.</start_of_turn
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, indeed wet the area of the disease recently or leave a needle in the area until the disease has healed; and keep them stopped, because they cause pain when any disease is felt so much as is necessary.</start_of_turn
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish them to rest, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ash, and cover them all.</start_of_turn
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus ends the third part: restoration.</start_of_turn>
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very useful for the art of medicine; and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation of bones.</start_of_turn
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son of you doctors, vulgars and those who at this time do not remember the ancients or do not read their letters.</start_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is useful that this art of medicine is private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time; and I have not acquired it from anyone, but by reading the books of the ancients and studying to understand them, until I have extracted the science from them.</start_of_turn
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I direct it to experience and study throughout my life.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And thus I have described in this chapter all that I have learned about this matter and about which I have experience; for I have abridged what I have said to you others and delivered you from the burden of long discourse; and I have opened up in the end of the abbreviation; and I have shown you in the end of the declaration; and I have formed in this matter various forms of the pangs that are administered in this case, just as it is done in addition to the declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from this fracture of bones, from which the previous preface is necessary, before we begin to recall the fractured limbs and various if each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore we shall speak in this chapter of the sums of the speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning are forced by the artificer and placed upon the truth of those things; so is you and those who know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents happen to an arm fracture or dislocation or twist or otherwise, the hour covers that you should immediately apply a cold compress or allay to that, or whatever helps, if you do not prohibit any cause, just as from duty of virtue, or that which happens to a child, or an old man in decrepitude, or is a time of violent heat, or violent cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And thus be content in food with fresh herbs and boiled meats of calves and crabs; and prohibit large meats and fill if of foods and of all food that fills the veins of sanctity, until you are sure of postoperative caution, and if you do not fear the escape of matter from the limb
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And the hour returns the patient to their first place where they usually lie.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the fractured bone begins to be restored, the hour covers that the patient should not be given nourishing foods of great size and difficulty in which there is viscosity, just as are foods made of wheat cooked with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and beef tripe, and oats, and eggs, and fresh peas, and large bread and things similar to these, and in this regimen is useful the coagulation of the fracture more quickly and gently
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that bones break when they are in the homes that are in the first vigor and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and be consolidated according to their nature by the dehydration of their limbs
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time for the dehydration of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated those that are of them at the end of the lenity, just as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	May be, however, nature adjusts and remembers about the fractured bone from all parts whatever cause is similar to glue in which it is thickness that adheres and strengthens that which until it is taught to adhere and join together, until it comes to the end of stiffness and rest, just as at the beginning of the heat, until any cause does not prohibit that from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to rest the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many different fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the forearm; and in the same way all the others are diverse among them
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I recall from all the species of fracture, exposed in the separate chapter distinct from the other
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many different fractures in their very essence.<end_turn>
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their very essence; for it is a useful fracture arched another that occurs in their stars; and some fractures are useful according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the hip and ankle and wrist, which originate from causes that do not originate, just as it is in the penalty when it is prepared to write, and is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and is a minor fracture fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in all species there is a peculiar remedy or pain in the restoration according to what will be remembered in the distinct places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this it is known that there is a fracture of the bone: it is tortures of the limb, and from that eminence and appearance of the limb to the feeling, and so of it when you press it with your hand
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when it is not in the place apparent torture or when it is not believed to be there, do not touch it when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not find great pain, the hour is not here a fracture
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is either pain or a slight fracture, whereupon you should not move your hand or compress it; there should be rest from the medicines which are appropriate at that moment in that place; and it should be strictly bound.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that when the limb is bent and is not fractured into two or otherwise that it does not suffer serious damage, as when the whole part is carefully moved, the hour covers that you begin to rectify it immediately when it happens afterwards
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it happens afterwards with the cautery, the hour leaves it for a few days until the swelling subsides; and at the same time it supports that according to any manner that can be lifted and supported
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration and swelling of the limb is lighter than the bone in which the fracture has occurred
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And so do what will remind you of that moment
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More so, if there is a fracture in the bone, the hour is necessary to extend this limb broken from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position should be such that you place the limb loosely according to its natural figure, while the broken parts are extended from the limb; the hour teaches you that you must return those after-effects with support and in any way you can manage in their places
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And keep yourself according to your force that you do not cause further pain to the patient by your operation or injury; and teach you how to apply one bone with the other so that they are companions in various forms for a thousand hours.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And you cover that in that hour you take advantage of your touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is any other cause, rectify that and support that for the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Forgive violent stretching and compression, just as foolish doctors do who make the after-effects of the cautery worsen by their operation, or who make the limb contract as they have seen with the operation of their patients.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And so I say, equating and doing a decent operation and stricture of that limb, and rest and tranquility; remind the patient about what has happened and make him avoid moving his hand in the hour of his vigil and sleep, and see his recovery and agitation, and do his egestion, and do all his movements with all his virtue; and wait until the position of the limb is a position in which the pain is secured, which is what causes that whenever it is in the position of the painful limb or lesion; the hour teaches you that you must change that to another position in which there is no pain; and keep that position so that the limb does not suffer from any tortion when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the limb is that which I recommend; for you know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those which are small like the arm and the finger and the toe and similar to those, the hour teaches you that the covering should be of soft material.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And those which are large like the thigh or the chest, cover that it should be a solid and hard covering, because the strong ligament that connects the great limb with the strong limb sustains that from all parts with equal strength, without causing any bruising
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And so I say, do the evacuation of the wound, pause the convenient ligament at the place of that fracture with three coverings or four as the limb deserves; and strengthen your hand a little bit on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And so I say, look at the most elevated part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than that where you have strengthened the limb of the fracture
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And so I say, lengthen the covering of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the stricture little by little, until you have taken away a large part of the limb
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And so I say, take another bandage and cover that wound over the broken limb with the covering; and look at the coverings at the furthest part of the fracture; and your operation is in the stricture of the covering and in the softening of that as we said in the first covering
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And so I say, rest between the positions of stopping a lion or a bear which is equal to the pain of the fracture, if there is pain; and if not, do not rest in any case.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And so I say, rest over the other bandage, and cover over these coverings adequately made so that if there is no swelling or after-effect of the cautery in the limb, the hour rests over that until the swelling has gone down; and leave that for a few days; and the hour strengthens over them again
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if it is of the greatest importance to form the staple in a skillful manner; or if it is of the foot; or of palm-shaped; let the width of each staple be in accordance with this form and this figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the staple that is placed over that fracture must be larger and thicker than the others, and its length must be according to the magnitude and smallness of the limb; and in addition to that, strengthen the staple with another object according to your first instruction; and finally, secure it firmly in place according to what has been said of the instruction, and that it is the staple itself that must be placed in the most suitable place of the fracture, and as long as the fracture is prolonged, it is better to make the staple longer.</end_of_turn>
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it must be covered that the threads are somewhat thicker in diameter and more flexible, and that they are of linen; and if the threads are too long, just as I have seen in the operation of the fracture of the forearm, leaving the threads of cordage twisted, is a great error, when the staple comes out equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And the very fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to secure the staple with them at those which you wish; and it must not be that there be less than a finger's width between the staple and the staple
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is like this for the ends of the staples, then stop leaving those stopa leon or lanas inside until they do not cause him damage.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some doctors consider it like a plague, and an accident of disruption of the corden; and I remember that in this chapter it has been said of the singularity
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every fractured limb is not immediately stable with the staples on the first day; the cause of which is that when the limb is large, it does not suffice to rest on it with the staples but rather after a few days or seven or eight, according to your estimate of the progress of recovery from the wound
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way in which the ancients restored the fractures, which were placed over fractures, dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering as a method of fracture restoration, convenient for many complex and majorly for the legs and arms, because of which concerning this one does not suffer heat or cold: and take from the flour dust, and this is the marrow of the wheat that hangs between the layers of the flour.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is convenient, so be it; but if it is in an egg of liquid, stop the setting of it not too thick or too thin; and use that one.</start_of_turn>
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of plastering is for fracture, dislocation and twist: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and marigold, which is ground from a thousand grains of gold; of mirra and aloes one dram; of aloes two drams. All these are powdered and sifted and mixed with water with oil or with egg white if the patient's wound is raw; and use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones pleasantly, and gives comfort to many people.</end_of_turn>
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of plastering which gives comfort for fracture and twist: recipe marigold and white alum at one dram; of mirra and aloes at one dram; of acacia at two drams; of linseed at three drams.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these are ground in a mortar with a stone container, and are crushed, and are mixed with water or with an egg of liquid and be administered.</start_of_turn
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and separated bones from their place, and when there is pain in those and in fissures and fractures: take a fine thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil cooked and put it on the area.</start_of_turn
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of healing of the wound and it expels pain properly.</start_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of dressing that restores the fracture: take alder leaves of fig tree and leaves of poppyseed; mix them together and make a dressing of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened method of dressing that is administered alongside the restoration of the fracture of bones and when you wish to resolve the residue of inflammation: mix together rue, chamomile and violet flowers, oatmeal flour, all in equal parts.</end_of_turn> Mix them all thoroughly and moisten them with wine, if the limb is not scorched.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scorched, however, do moisten it with water of columbine or water and use it.</end_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of dressing which is stronger in resolving this latter, when an abscess is present alongside the restoration of the limb: mix together rue and linseed seeds, barley, meadowsweet, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all in equal parts and poppyseed; mix them all thoroughly and moisten them with vinegar or other liquid or wine, as you consider appropriate according to the quality of the limb and the severity of the color of it.</end_of_turn>
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Ipocras does not declare in his book that it is appropriate to leave the limb open without supporting it alongside the restoration of the limb except for the purpose of applying wax and oil; and it is recommended that you keep it between thickness and thinness.</end_of_turn
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, in Gaul it is seen that it is appropriate to support the limb alongside the restoration of the limb and the causes of excessive heat are small calidity so as to be like myrrh, incense and the like of those causes which we have recommended.</end_of_turn
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of dressing that brings comfort to the lesion and pain: mix grated nutmeg, cloves, bruised parsley leaves or pennyroyal leaves, rue, salt, equal parts; mix them all thoroughly, sift them and moisten them, and make a dressing.</end_of_turn
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the quantity according to which you should cover the ligament should be such that you consider neither too little nor too much pain, nor if the bone is not fractured not to cause more pain. In this case, do not remove the dressing for many days.</end_of_turn
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if suddenly the area experiences violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should quickly remove the dressing at that moment and keep the dressing on it.</end_of_turn
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a sponge of linen and sea sponge dipped in lukewarm water, and wet that with vinegar; and with that wash the area until the swelling and pain cease; then place a bandage over the area for an hour; and then place over it a cloth soaked in strong vinegar and olive oil or olive oil with rosemary, and bind over it for a night until you are sure that the abscess has drained, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and that the pain has ceased.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this restriction loosely and make the dressing smaller and do not tighten it too much for your initial constriction, and withdraw it when it is well.</end_of_turn
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the abscess, swelling, pain and inflammation and all these ailments have already subsided, and digestion of the dressing and restriction has begun, then repeat that in this way as you did at the beginning when you started the healing process.</end_of_turn
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause related to those which we have mentioned has occurred in the limb, then do not remove the dressing until three or four or five or seven days.</end_of_turn and as many as maintain that it should be left for xx days according to your judgement for the healing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture has healed, and when the blood clot has formed over that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust in the restriction more than in your initial restriction throughout, and adjust in the digestion of the patient's food, following the recollection of it.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	However, if sometimes the limb dries out and contracts more than it was covered, then you must know that food is prohibited for that; and therefore give him lukewarm water instead of food for the entire period of the treatment; and do it for three days; and slightly loosen the restriction for this operation to be able to provide the limb with nourishment, and it will recover pleasantly.</end_of_turn
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, what the doctors do in the restoration of the limb after it has been fractured is another folly when it is not restored at the beginning, as they do with torment, and it is a great fear, and if they were more discreet they would make the ailments worse in their freedom and would be worse off with it.</end_of_turn
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have never seen anyone do that, for it is more reasonable that they do not do it.</end_of_turn>
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol segon: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are different, for every fracture is caused by percussion of space, and percussion hinders all the bones within the cavity, which remains in the limb, as it happens in the forearm, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called fracture of the bone; or the space penetrates any part of the bone, and penetrates the marrow of it, but does not pass through to the back of the bone; and this kind of fracture is called complete fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of a fracture that is contracted or contained; and the cause of it is percussion with a blunt object or sometimes with a sharp object, and it persists.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating which already approaches the canal which is left in the limb; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is that which is hidden in the bone, in the marrow of the small vessel, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is caused by blow or by chance or by percussion of stone and it persists, which makes enter every lamina of the bone to the parts around it, and is caused in the hollow part just as when it happens in the bones of the forearm when it is struck by percussion and a part of it enters the parts around it.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most of all it is caused in the bones of soft parts, as for example the heads of the bones of the fingers and toes
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus of all these types of fractures, these are masses just like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come to remember all this in this place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these kinds of fractures by recognition on them and for their inquiry in order to attempt them and to establish the corruption of marrow which is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is known because it is discovered on the bone, and it is excised, and it limits itself with a tension, which makes the fracture appear black
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Maybe in the treatment of fracture one must take into consideration at the beginning the signs of illness, and when sometimes for the signs that signify for significance appear regarding fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, syncope, and acute fever, and if these signs are accompanied by swelling and pain in those parts, despite all these precautions, it is not healthy.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if sometimes non-current accidents happen to you, you hope for health, the hour you begin the treatment of them
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it is revealed to you at the beginning like it is revealed and that is in the days of spring, the hour you must study the bone marrow giving the day fourteen according to all custom
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, the hour you must hide the bone marrow giving the seventh day, having understood that what remains of the bone is corrupted from the canal, and that these signs accompany these accidents which we have recommended
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the canal covering the brain, and is split into small fragments and contained, the hour you must insert the split fragment and bind it, as I recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you take the head of the disease which is plagued, and discover about the bone as it is customary and handle it as you are able according to the figure of the plague, and that you are curious about the disease.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you discover the fracture, flux of blood of cautery, the hour you oppose it with what you can and what covers it, that you cover the place with clean linen soaked in oil and vinegar, and make the plague rest until the cautery is sedated; and be sure to flux blood of the sanctuary; and start from the circumference of the bone and from its ablation
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one of the methods is that you insert the bone with a straight incision like this: And then you administer another incision which is a little wider than the first; and this is like this:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And you administer more of the latter incision than the former
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And cover that you must give your name of various incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the back of the acuity of their extremities, and they are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use their hands to facilitate percussion over the sensitive area so that you do not damage the head and cause further damage.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the swelling is strong and firm, then pierce the circumference of the limb giving an injection at the same time, for which the unguents are named superficial.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called thus unless the bone at the end is close to that which is left with the head of the limb like a margin or a small circle, which must not be immersed in liquid or subjected to pressure
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a great number of these injections, since in all tests of the brain and limbs which are acute, the quantity in length and breadth should be in proportion to the quantity of spiciness of that test
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three injections: The quality of perforating in the circumference of the fractured bone is that you pause the injection on the bone and rotate that around the toes until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then exchange the injection to another place and stop when there is between too much of the thickness of the ray or when the surrounding area is affected.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And so inject around the bone where there is a fracture, making that which remains over the surrounding area more fluid than before, as we have said, until the bone is eradicated, or with your hand, or by any other cause which may produce swelling, such as splinters and fine forceps.</start_of_turn>
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	Take care that the injection does not touch any cause of swelling.</start_of_turn>
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore when you have pierced the circumference of the bone, and if you continue without separating it from the swelling, then extract that which is outside, keep that which is inside wet with something like the injection, but make sure that it is more solid and more fluid than the others.</start_of_turn
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there remains any small pieces of bone and fragments, then take that out with ease using water which will soften the pain; and then take care of the wound with lint and ointment as we have said.</start_of_turn
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operating is light, long and laborious, which is to dissect the heel and the ankle for a great wound; and this is its name: it is necessary at the beginning to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most obvious, until when you have discovered that part and have stopped leaving the limb of that injection slow and easy from which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the flat part is lean and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is of it in two slopes forward in length, as sometimes; that the flat part should be adjusted to the swelling with the face of it which is incident acutely on the bone.</start_of_turn
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And so puncture the injection with a little mallet so that you can put all the bone in easily as it is rotated, and you must be sure that there is no risk of causing an accident in any way, and if the physician is the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant, certainly he will sleep.</start_of_turn
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there remains any attached cause to the bone of the ankle or in the place of bones, puncture that with the limb of the injection that is flat, and deliver that with ease, for it is loosened from it without documents and without fear.</start_of_turn
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone is not penetrated within the ankle, and that which is broken or remaining of the bone is the face of it, and remains in the swelling and fragments, then take that out with fine instruments as you have prepared, in various quantities so that you can manage to administer them in all places with the greatest convenience and the most gentleness of those that you can lose in that operation that broken bone and the figure of it.</start_of_turn
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And take care that you administer at the beginning of these quantities the most liquid of those quantities, and use a little of the solid of them, and do not stop until you have administered the most solid and the most fluid of all.</start_of_turn
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small fractures of the capillaries and subtle fractures, take care that you administer with care according to what you find to be the right cure.</start_of_turn
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is known by all those who have studied in this art.</start_of_turn
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And so we have shown in great fractures.</start_of_turn>
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the ankle is rectangular when you extract the bone, then take hold of it according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place that over the orifice of the wound; and take another cloth doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and olive oil and place that over the thumb and do to the pus whatever you please that can come over that, without injuring it; and administer over that ligament flat, and do not strain that until the wound is alone.</start_of_turn
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave him thus for a day or two until you are certain the cautery has ceased; then remove it and administer medicines which are superfluous in such cases, thus as salt of lin and oatmeal, powdered herbs, and of enses and aristologia, and like those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And thus, sprinkle these medicines finely over the wound, thus as when they are dry; and generally give all medicines of such qualities as will not irritate or harm.</end_of_turn>
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Beware lest the wound in your care become inflamed; neither add grease or any other substance to it; neither let it be exposed to excessive heat; for when it is applied to the cavity of the brain, it corrupts that and brings about death, and causes the patient great harm.</end_of_turn>
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When it is applied to the head cavity, as when the bone is toughened and especially when the care is scanty, and is black on the surface; therefore take heed lest it cause harm to the patient, for that is perilous in every way.</end_of_turn
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it does not cause blackness from the medicine that has been discontinued, and is in virtue of that medicine that caused that blackness, then take a little of that medicine and olive oil in parts three to one.</end_of_turn And thus apply a bandage, and place that over the cavity; and care for that which accords with the nature of the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .iii.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Restoration of the nose when it is fractured.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Beware that the nose is not fractured but merely displaced so that two bones remain, for the separated part is cartilaginous and is not fractured, but is softened and twisted and swollen.</end_of_turn
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If indeed one of the two parts is fractured, then you must introduce a little support into the nose, and bind that fracture with the said thread and with the said bandage, until the nose returns to its natural shape.</end_of_turn
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And thus it is well that you should facilitate this, and keep that you do not cause excessive pain for the patient during this operation.</end_of_turn>
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and you say that is not for this, then keep the height equal to the extremity of the ray where the thickness is small.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, you must make it resemble the above.</end_of_turn
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Cover the restoration of the nose in the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, keep it still for six days or until the cautery has subsided.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And put on the extremity of the nose a bandage of lint, if the fracture is in one part, or two cushions, if the fracture is in two parts, and the cushion should be of such thickness as to fill the cavity of the nose.</end_of_turn
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Tell the former restorers that the cushions should be bound over, and should be changed every day, though I do not see it; it must be that the bandage should be fixed with album of glue as with powdered rosin; and that you leave the bandage in place until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is hardened.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some people put sponges inside the nose instead of a cushion, because it is softer than the cushion of lint; and that the nose is already so inflamed that it is not prohibited from inspiration.</end_of_turn
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, do not.</end_of_turn
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another sponge comes loose after the cautery, plaster the nose with cerate or pitch infused in wine vinegar and olive oil, or with alum.</end_of_turn
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If it does not come loose after the cautery, keep it plastered with flour and powdered herbs mixed with glue of gum; and place your hand over it to stop the bleeding, and do not touch the nose in any way.</end_of_turn
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured with a slight fracture or deformity, then you must cut away those, and extract them with the instruments that are appropriate for those; and close the wound, and care for that which is inflamed and consolidated, and do so as necessary.</end_of_turn
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is swelling in the nose due to the cautery, then care for that with cushions and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.</end>
Capitol .iiii.	Capitol .iiii.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Restoring the jaw when fractured.</end_of_turn>
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is fractured and the fracture is not immediately painful, treat it only if it is displaced, and not if it is fractured in two and bent outwards.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; and in the same way, if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger of the right hand; and push down with the other hand on the area of the fracture outwards, and hold the other hand over that area.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two, then cover that you administer traction of two parts according to the rule until it is possible to equalize them.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If by chance there is displacement of teeth with disruption, strengthen those which you think will remain in place with gold or silver or gutta percha; and place your hand over the fractured jawbone, and place your hand over the duplicate tooth, and place your hand over the large bone nearby in a suitable place; and bind them up as is usual in such cases until the ligature is complete and the application is in place, until it is not destroyed.</end_of_turn>
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and tranquility, and abstain from eating fatty foods.</end_of_turn
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that the figure has already been altered in any way, cover it up and remove it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered from it and cover it with powder of mill, albumin or oatmeal, because you have not finished with it yet, and place your hand over the plaster bandage.</end_of_turn
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when it is fixed and adjusted that plaster over it, and the condition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for if you remove it before that, the fracture will be stretched in three segments.</end_of_turn
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound occurs later on, cover it up as we have said in the case of pain, until it is healed, and remove that wound.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is painless, consider whether it is a broken bone or displaced fragments, for in this case I order you to remove those fragments with what is convenient in the removal of those that cause the pain.</end_of_turn
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound is wide, expand it with the forceps according to the amount of your need.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finally removed those fragments, and those that you did not remove remain, cover the wound if it is wide; or if not, place one of the plasters that you consider convenient over it and bind that, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .v.	Restoring the jaw when fractured, for the fifth time.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Restoring the jaw when fractured.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A fracture of the jaw is usually caused by injury to the teeth in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in three ways.</end_of_turn
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because either it is fractured, or displaced, or is displaced into two parts without causing fragments; and the restoration of it is difficult; or because there has occurred displacement of fragments, and it is difficult to restore them; or because the fracture is painless.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in that operation, when the fracture is painless, two assistants are necessary, so that one holds the fractured jaw and the other extends the collar over that part.</end_of_turn
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And bandage the fracture with the fingers inside until the shape is restored according to what is covered, and not too high or too low.</end_of_turn
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you require more extension, cover that you stop the tingling of the patient's lip hopes for thread or gauze, and the size of it according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the jaw and hold it with your hand until the fracture is bound according to what is covered.</end_of_turn
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the limb of the jaw outwards towards the outside, for fear of causing a displacement, cover that the patient should lie on his chest, and place your hand over the muscle of it a cushion of moderate size.</end_of_turn
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistants hold the muscle of it towards the outside until the jawbone is elevated higher than it is in the preon, and then you can rectify the fracture and bandage it with the fingers inside.</end_of_turn
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	May it be that even if you feel satiety from the spur of the fork and your mood is gloomy, the hour demands that you take off from that and extract those satiety matters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bones, the hour necessitates incision of them with one of the instruments you have prepared for this, because you have left the fork inside which causes torment to the stomach; and that torment is of the kind that comes from a wound or from iron, of which this is the form
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is like a wound of which this is the cavity; and its breadth according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be as much as possible for the operation; that there be two extremities thus at times, and one wide and the other narrow
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the satiety from the bone is wide, and you are sure of the closure, the hour adjusts the two lips of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or you fear closure with the cautery, the hour will use the wound with gauze and powders according to the quantity of the wound
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if the closure with the cautery should happen, the hour inflates the area with vinegar and olive oil and wine, and rests upon it.<end_turn>
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the stiffness of the bone when the wound is closed and the section is over, be that you place a plaster made of ground wheat with egg white on the wound and rest it upon a cushion, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.  If you have swallowed from that, and you have taken water, prevent the blood from clotting by placing double powder over the wound and the plaster.  Then take a sponge of table salt whose breadth is three fingers and whose length is similar; and wrap it around the wound, and then wrap the wound around the sponge on the fracture site.  And prevent the sponge from slipping by placing a wet bandage over it, and keep it from slipping by covering the area with it, and reduce the swelling of the fracture to the amount that is not visible to you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all this, that the sponge does not slip from the fractured bone; and so that you can see the pain every day, for when it is softened or when the sponge has already become softened, the hour will rectify this and strengthen the bandage
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And finally, prevent the patient from sleeping on the pain over the area, and keep their feet elevated during the night a small cushion; so that at that time the support of the area is raised at the level of the muscle; or that the arm is bound to the area at the level of the area.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the bandage if it does not happen in the place or with closure, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the wound at that time, and adjust the stiffness and restore that which was restored until it is restored and the fracture of the ankle is coagulated
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strong and comfortable according to the month in eighty days, and some women are healed in a month of time from that.
Capitol .vi.	End of Document
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Treatment of ankle fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The ankle bone is fractured in the lateral area and is not fractured at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is fractured in the area of the bone — and it is fractured in the middle of the area — and is not known except by touch, the hour according to the shape of the fracture forces you to prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every way that is possible for you to manage it
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And finally, place a powder of wheat with egg white on the wound and a cushion; and place double powder over the wound; and place a sponge of table salt around the wound according to the quantity of the spatula or rather a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May the sponge be surrounded by the concavity in some parts of the spatula, the hour will encase that concavity with a cushion, and finally place the sponge according to equality
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And finally, strengthen the bandage with a wet bandage of long duration with a tight constriction and with a firm hold of the sponge until it is softened from the inside out
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the bandage every day; and when it is softened, lie another day and strengthen it and keep the sponge equal to the sponge if it is softened from the inside out
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	They already knew in those ancient times that it was caused by cold humors.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And so they say: cover with food the evil that brings about swelling and wind, because the belly should be swollen and extended, and the fracture should be impeded at the outer parts.</end_of_turn>
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we take care of this so that it does not become the cause of excessive bleeding; if not, it will happen in any case; and if it has already happened, then in this case it will be of help.</end_of_turn>
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And I tell you that it is necessary to suspend from the wind and approach as if to a wound; and it is similar to reasoning, but indeed it is feared that the wind will draw out the humors from the area for the weakening.</end_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And I tell you that it is necessary to cover the area with a bandage that is already submerged in warm oil, and keep dust between the vertebrae until it is full, that the ligature be gentle when embracing that according to its roundness; and indeed take care of the evil with the care of nourishment and medicine.</end_of_turn>
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction of the patient who does not suffer from it, and if you prick him with a needle, remember about the patient, for indeed cover that the limb is fractured, uncover the broken edge, and indeed hold down that instrument which preserves the contents, remembering that which precedes it, and that it escapes from them, extracting that.</end_of_turn
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And indeed adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, by boiling, and cure that with plaster until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if bleeding occurs, then cover with a cloth and pour powder in scented oil and place over the area, and that the evil be cured with that which covers the bleeding.</end_of_turn
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And rest on the side on which you sleep, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .ix.	End of document.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Restoration of the fracture of the vertebra of the thigh and of the pelvis.</start_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veins bleed after fracture of the bones of the pelvis, and it is necessary to cauterize them, and it is similar to the vertebrae of the thigh.</start_of_turn
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if he is healed or not, consider that sometimes the wounds are already softened and stupefying and dead, and that you cannot make them swell or extend or straighten them without causing them to bleed again. If you tighten them with the belt or prick them with a needle and there is no pain in them, it is known that they are not healed.</start_of_turn
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you make them swell with the belt and prick them with a needle, it is known that the bone is saved and the evil will go away with care.</start_of_turn
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the thigh like this and you want to know if he is healed or not, consider the feet.</start_of_turn
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Indeed, sometimes they are already softened, it happens in the most serious cases, and indeed when it is lying on the thighs, it is windy and the urine is involuntary, and several veins are already resting on the thighs and cannot urinate, knowing that this is mortal, and do not work in the care of these.</start_of_turn
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May there not be any other cause of these, for the cause is better and lighter.</start_of_turn
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the care of these is that you perforate with the cautery at the point of the fracture covered with warm oil, or with vinegar of eggs; and place over that anything that gives the veins rest.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And indeed remove one of the comfortable and existing plasters, and tighten over that which binds; and command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not to sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.</start_of_turn
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if bleeding occurs from the fractured bone or any other cause that has already separated from it, then cover that the limb is fractured; and indeed adjust the two lips of the wound, with stitches if necessary; and indeed take care of that which is necessary for the recovery of the wound, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Indeed if the thigh bone is fractured, and it is the end of the limb, then cover that you put your left hand on the buttock and that you embrace the fractured bone with the other hand as much as is possible for the equation according to the second rule; and indeed place over that plaster and bandage, if necessary, and tighten that.</start_of_turn
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you sit with your buttocks trending downwards, then lie over that way and keep that way, and care for the wound with the care that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	When you sit with your buttocks hanging downwards, then lie in that position and keep that position, and care for the wound with the care that precedes until it is healed.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of the limb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are often fractured, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not other than a communication in the extremities of those and are inscribed in the length and decline towards the lower parts; and this causes pain in the area and puncture, and the limb is stupefaco when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it, then you embrace that as much as you are able to until it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May be if the fracture is in the thigh or that it already declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie over the belly until it is prepared for you the restoration of that fracture
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And therefore when you have embraced that, place over it a compress, and place over that a bandage of wool or linen, and bind firmly about the which you fear no puncture of fracture or loosening of the bone.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And embrace the cavity with that which fills that which that prevents the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or rest on their side with the shoulder relaxed
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May be if after this the cautery escapes, then you cease the extension of it and the restoration of it until the escape of the cautery has ceased, and place over that which is over that as much as is necessary until it is relaxed; and then return to the restoration of it, and bind firmly again as before
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the buttocks or are comminuted, then you must treat them
Capitol .xi.	End of document.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restoration of the fracture of the adductor.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor is that which is between the crease inside the hip and the head of the femur
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in two ways, of which is that you grasp with your hand a fist of coarse sand according to this fashion:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And join in two extremities two ligaments, and then suspend it from the elevated place
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a seat; and then put the limb with the fractured bone outside over the fist until it reaches the navel of it in the middle of which the curvature of the thigh is attached
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over that any hard cause, or if the limb extends to the lower parts; and then the physician shall put what is necessary so that the fracture is as close to its place as possible until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient is supine on the cervical side and suspend the hand of the knee at the ligament; and command two attendants that one of them holds what is below the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the legs of it; and each of them extends to his part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish that the extension should be stronger, then you bind firmly over the fracture with one ligament and over that with the other ligament, and each of the attendants extends both his parts
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is proximate to the extremity of the muscle, then cover that half of the ligament over the navel and the other over the fracture beyond the crease.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly if the fracture is close to the crease, then cover that ligament over that place and over that crease
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Embrace that with ease and rest, and when it is embraced as much as it should be according to that which is applied for good application, then bind firmly that which if no escape of cautery occurs
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	May be if after this the cautery escapes, then lay aside the stricture for seven days, and place over that a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil until the escape of the cautery has ceased, and then bind firmly again that which before
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to bind that is to place a compress over the fracture, and then place a bandage around the compress; and adjust the arm over that adductor, and place your hand open over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And rest the limb and bind firmly over the adductor the arms so that the arm is in place of stiffness, if it does not impede anything of the fracture of the bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	The hour has come.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you pause over the fracture that which is thicker and stronger than the others; and pause between every two bones the breadth of a finger, and the length of the bones according to the fracture plus three fingers from the base.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the bones at the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your grasp over the area of the fracture be very tight
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is long, the grasp should be less tight
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus if sometimes the position of the bones and the grasp are as we have said at the beginning when you restore the limb to its proper position, then the hour has passed
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear swelling from the cautery, then you leave the grasp and the bones inside for seven days as we have said
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place of bruising or swelling; or it is prohibited to feed the limb to prevent surplus of grasp; and therefore rectify all that we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Maybe if you are confident that no cause of this will happen, the hour will not remove the bandage until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And be your sleep from the patient on the side, and the attendants more on the chest.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause over the attendants who are cooking full of wool padding, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not swollen or dissolved the figure of the fractured limb, or that the ligament is softened, therefore rectify all that with your ability.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause feeding the patient according to the order that we have given more, except that the food is lukewarm at the beginning until it is grasped; and the hour orders that you remove the food from them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the custom of the attendants and the change of them is that they be strengthened for seven days; and the hour orders that they be removed and that bath be administered and that medicine be given, which will rectify that
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is late, the hour does not order to remove the bandage from that limb for a day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two knuckles; of which one is small, and that which is at the little finger, and the other is great and that which is grasped from beyond the little finger, from the part beyond the little finger
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it is strong that only the greater knuckle is fractured, or the small, or that both are fractured together
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the little knuckle is fractured, the hour of its restoration is light, and the healing is easier
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the greater knuckle is fractured from beyond the little finger, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worse of all is when both bones are fractured together
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone that is fractured is the little one away from the body, the hour is convenient for the doctor to restore it, that is to say that he should pause little extension until that one is healed
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if the greater knuckle is that which is fractured, the hour orders that you pause extension more vehemently
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, the hour orders that you avoid any violent movement
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must pause the figure of the hand during the restoration of it and the extension of it supported on a cushion, and that the thumb be lower than the other fingers, and that the patient be centered on a cushion that has fallen down
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion under the limb at the height or below it, so that the patient does not suffer work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let another attendant extend the arm from the part beyond the elbow towards the shoulder or towards the ligament, and another attendant extend the other in the same way
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the doctor join the bone until it is reduced according to the better figure that can be made
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the account of the bone there is swelling, the hour orders that you reduce all the limb in the place with your ability.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If on the other hand it appears in the patient that the swelling is separated and that the knee joint is not recovering as you had hoped, then withdraw from it and leave that according to the manner which we have taught you.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is open, and I have already made an incision, then take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if by chance the cautery should slip at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a piece of cotton soaked in oil and white wax, and put half between sponges and coarseness, and press firmly on that area until the swelling subsides; then keep the cotton there and place a prepared plaster over it made from powdered charcoal and powdered glass, and press firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in the greater precautions, or that the fracture is in one or two bones together
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then place your support firmly over the area of the fracture, and when more than enough has passed from the upper parts of the fracture to the lower parts of it, withdraw the support somewhat less strongly than before.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths which cover the fracture should be moist cloths, not dry or rough, and the thread which is used to tie it should be of a size neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.</start_of_turn>
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the ligament for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs which requires rectification, as for example in the limb, then do so immediately and cover the limb with cold water until the swelling subsides.</start_of_turn>
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Keep the limb still until the pain subsides, and then remove the support.</start_of_turn>
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the swelling has already subsided and the bone has already recovered and appears as before, then rectify everything with your skill.</start_of_turn>
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from going to the limb because of excessive support, because in that case cover that little bit and leave that for a few days until it has recovered, and strengthen that.</start_of_turn
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if no other cause occurs which we have mentioned, do not remove the support for approximately xx days or so.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And do not allow the patient to move their hand for their violent movement, and make them sleep on two pillows.</start_of_turn
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or for the most part in xxviii days, according to the condition of the complications and the ability of the art.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and the fingers.</start_of_turn
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the thumb and the fingers there is a fracture, and that it does not happen to them except by tearing soft tissue.</start_of_turn
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or the bone is fractured, then cover that the patient should continue to lie down and rest it gently as before, and place the hand over that which is extended.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor unites them until they are congruent with good congruence.</start_of_turn
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And cover that you stop the plaster and the cautery, if it does not happen to slip; and press the bandage according to the amount of the area, and you have already covered that with oil.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is at the base of the thumb you must bend the palm of the hand, and make the patient keep it like that, and command the patient to strengthen that with the thumb fractured; strengthen it with oil long.</start_of_turn
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the splint which is on the wrist must be placed on the palm of the hand, so that the hand is applied to the palm; strengthen that as much as you cover.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outside of the wrist, then cover that the splint is placed on the inside of the palm and another on the outside of the palm, so that the hand is open and closed; and press the support, as the hand is rotated between the fingers with the ligaments.</start_of_turn
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in some of the bones of the fingers, if it is said to be displaced, then it must be united as much as you cover it and strengthen it with the palm of the hand, and if you want, support the small bones of the fingers so that the fracture is elevated and not crushed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May be if the fracture is in the other limb, just as in the middle toe, or in the index finger, or in the thumb, or in the ankle, or in the little toe, then it is equal and bound with the same name; or if they are all bound according to continuity, it is better; or stop over that little star, just as we have said before.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider, in your restoration, and indeed that, the arrangement of aftercare of cautery and oppose — alongside the present operation — against what happens when any cause of these is repeated, as it is repeated in the narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.</start_of_turn
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone which has been violently fractured is split and is declared as feeling according as it is converted to the surrounding parts and the surrounding pus.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strained over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient is placed prone on the abdomen and on the face.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And indeed the minister extends all the ligament to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.</start_of_turn
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	May be if it is close to the hip, however, the ligament is rather directed to the nail at the part of the fifth, so that the extension rests upon it, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And in the same way if the fracture is close to the nail, however, the ligament is rather directed to the nail, and the extension is towards the parts left.</start_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And indeed the doctor should bite the bone both above and below until the fracture is reduced according to the natural conformation and the bone is joined by a good connection; the hour covers that rest plaster and stricture, if it does not happen to the limb aftercare.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	May be if it happens in the aftercare, however, the hour allows that to pass for a few days until the cautery aftercare is softened, and indeed return to your care.</start_of_turn
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture is indeed sufficient: cover that you cover with a hard bandage over the fracture, and bend that two or three times, and remove its excess; and indeed cover the limb until it reaches the hip and the hip itself.</start_of_turn
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And indeed keep long thread firmly between the hip and the limb next to the nail at the parts left, and bring the extremities of the thread to the part of the pus surrounding the two parts, and indeed roll over the limb and the hip over that which exceeds the bandage.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And indeed rest over the hip at the place of that fracture star, and rest from those a little star over the bone of the limb.</start_of_turn
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And indeed fill the spaces between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is solidified.</start_of_turn
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And indeed begin with a strong stricture from the middle over the place of the fracture with three bands or four, and when you have advanced to the ligament of the place of the fracture, your stricture is less and lighter and softer.</start_of_turn
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And indeed extend two extremities of the thread to the parts left until it reaches the ankle, and strain both extremities of the nails of the other side so that the ligament is not pulled from the place.</start_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And indeed rest the stricture over that, so that neither the limb is deformed nor the cautery aftercare nor swelling occurs and that it remains like that; and if any cause of these should happen, then immediately take away that which causes it, and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said above.</start_of_turn
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	May be if in the bone is bad of the bone which put, however, the hour covers that you bite that according to what is possible; and if not, leave it out and remove that, and care for what precedes the memory until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And indeed every bandage is strained for this fracture of the thigh bone another way that they are adjusted to the nails, as we have said in the instruments and in the arms.</start_of_turn
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	May be indeed in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not happen to the patient's lameness; and if it is restored alone, another way that the other limb is applied, the hour is necessary that the one which is lame be lame.</start_of_turn
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And indeed know that the thigh bone is strained for forty days or a little more or a little less, according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other resources.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Capital XV.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that the fracture of the ankle bone often happens with great violence towards the soft parts around it.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If there is violence towards the fracture, the only thing that is seen is a fissure or break in its parts, and that is neither pain nor swelling, and over that all is sensation
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is that it is greased that which is broken in the parts of it until it is united and joined as much as possible for equality and facility and making.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And put on a bandage and keep your hand over that round star, if you order that; and strengthen it as much as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the precautions that we have recommended in other fractures, just as for example the ointment of cautery and the similar ones that are opposed to all accidents that may happen to it until it is healed
Capitol .xvi.	Capital XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	From the restoration of the fracture of the femur
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the femur there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called the femur; and the other is thin, and it is called the fibula
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And the violence of any kind of fracture that happens to both bones of the leg is such that for its restoration it is as much necessary as the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are fractured together, the femur is converted to all its parts
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is fractured, the femur is converted to the parts surrounding it
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thick bone is fractured, you must leave it like that, and that is from these causes that you are not aware of
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And give it extension and equality and support of the limbs according to the healing.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the femur is slight without great swelling, that the extension should be more gentle and lighter, and relieve you from your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the femur there is any cause of operation over the arm, and that is when your bones are aligned and when you have completed all your work of the operation, then you will take hold of the heel of the foot which is held away from the causes that are held back alone, and it is enough to grasp those which are small in greatness, and do not touch the hands, and let the length of these be according to the length of the femur and the ankle until to the heel.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And cover over any wound with two coverings according to their length, and keep one over the part of the femur from one side and the other from the other side, and they should reach from the ankle until to the heel of the foot
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two bones in three places at the two extremities and at the middle, so that the structure of the femur is prohibited from leaning to the right and left, and stays in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a plaster cast has been administered according to the length of the femur; and keep it fixed in it the femur so that it conserves that movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly keep that you do not feel any pain in the fracture, and when that is properly healed
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in every day the femur and study it in that way, and you will keep it from posturing and from swelling or from other causes similar to these; and when any cause of these happens, the hour you will take it from it until it is healed
Capitol .xvii.	Capital XVII
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	From the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not often fracture; however, the bones of the foot do sometimes fracture; and as for the toes, they rarely fracture, and they do not fracture except in cases of great violence.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot must fracture sometimes, and these bones must sometimes be elevated between them, then put the patient's foot on the prepared earth as if you were going out
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And keep the foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and put on shoes, and hold and heal those until they are back in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And immediately stop the bleeding and hold, and stop the juice from the foot a little table on which are two plugs of plaster.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And immediately stretch that which is on the foot and straighten it down, because you have covered that with gauze and other things of which you must inquire.</end_of_turn>
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will remove the ligament, because you will find the bones united or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in these cases is quite painful.</end_of_turn>
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if anyone says they are fractured, then restore those and bind those thus as I have said and command you to do in the restoration of the hand bones.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And immediately stop the bleeding from the fractured bone according to the length of the bone; and put a little more pressure on it; and then place the foot on the little table that I have recommended, and stretch that which is straightened down.</end_of_turn>
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the bones that are fractured are two or three or more, then you immediately stop the bleeding from each bone that is enveloped in soft leather, and stretch the table under the foot and stand over one of the heads of the table under the foot so that it has good retention.</end_of_turn>
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you to know that you must not neglect all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pay attention to all that we have said about this.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn>
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh and of the bone of the heel and of the ankle bone.</end_of_turn
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the thigh is fractured, then immediately cease in the painful swelling, and incline that towards the part of the two a little, and keep it stretched out behind.</end_of_turn
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And immediately fill the wound with cotton wool, and keep the bone of the foot firmly in place as expected; and elevate the two little toes a little, so that all that is outside is forgotten until the part of the bone is back in place as expected and the fractured bone returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And immediately stop powders on the two sides, and when you want to urinate, moisten the cotton wool easily and immediately, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which it was at the beginning, and immediately return the powder from before.</end_of_turn
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or until it is restored.</end_of_turn
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take once a vessel of oil and stretch over the ankle a catheter of glass; and pour all the vessel into the foot, and immediately apply pressure in the catheter until the vessel is filled up until the fracture returns.</end>
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And immediately fill the wound with cotton wool and keep it for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the heel or of the thigh is fractured, then immediately administer in the restoration and agility of them what we have recommended in the ankle bone.</end_of_turn
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is fractured is not hidden in these primary fractures and that little pain, mostly for one who has studied and practiced this book; for that fracture means for you in the greatest possibilities of restoration and in the strengthening of them, and therefore understand well.</end_of_turn
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the ankle bone when it is fractured, take unguents of ivy, and put the ankle in that; and immediately stop over the covering of cotton wool, and keep it covered, and keep it like that for three days or until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bones when it is inflamed.</end_of_turn
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in that in which the fracture has occurred with swelling, and especially if the bone is large as that of the thigh or the heel, or similar to that, that you take care of them and apply poultices to them as much as possible, even if the symptoms of inflammation testify to the contrary as we have said.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling subsides, then immediately cover that you keep at the retention of them what you have powdered over them before, if for another reason it is not present.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And immediately begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong that, if not the after-pain appears.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May be if an accident happens after the cautery, then you must leave the restoration of the limb until the swelling has subsided, until the swelling has gone down, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth in total, for you will cause further accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	May be if the bone is fractured, it is imminent on the surface of the wound, then you must know that you must perforate in order to reduce and heal that with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May be if the extension is not as you have prepared and the equilibrium of the limb is in your thighs, then you must reduce that with your hands; and that is a wound that is made by the iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers and the width according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason the doctor must anticipate those three or four according to the quantity that you indicate in the cure of every kind of fracture
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be round, and be in it little roughly so that it is not doubled from the pressure during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be from the acute limb to which it is bound in the joints of the limbs; and be attentive to the decrease of it to the greatest extent, and from the middle to the parts
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the way of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is little pale
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that you must suspend the acute limb elevated over the limb of the prominent bone
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert it into a groove until the bone returns, and be healed with any equilibrium
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to heal the limbs of the fracture between them, and if the fractured limb is thin, and you do not take that wound into account, then you must insert the limb of that bone until the instrument has power over it
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May be if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then you must cut away that which covers it from the dissectors whom we have mentioned; or saw that with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape away that which remains in the bone of asperity and small sores
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the pain of the patient is calmed, then you must know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you can to comfort the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the limb is complete, which you have done to the bone, then you must immerse the limb in black vinegar, and indeed if it is in summer, and do not leave it on the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, for that will cause it to become inflamed and corrupt
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And indeed administer sponges at the time of eating as a supplement to the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered until you have inserted the tube with forceps and used bandages according to the quantity of the wound
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take care that you do not tighten the wound in the fracture, for many doctors have seen that this causes greater pain to the patients, and that it causes wounds to become infected or gangrenous, so it is better to leave it alone.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the limb strictures too much, soft, different from the stricture of other fractures
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is great or is bad, and you fear about those other accidents that we have recommended, and if you find pain in the place, then do not leave it on that bandage, but rather make that bandage of fine cloth in place of sponges and strengthen it with those things
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a couple of days have passed since the wound has begun, that there should be generated heat, then you must remove the sponge which you had placed on it with that vinegar, and then administer calamine, knowing that this is what we usually do to remedy wounds, just as we do with calamine tetrafarmacon and following that same method
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And remind you that you must remove the dressing and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and stopped, and that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pain will disappear from it to the parts beyond with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound has been going on for a few days, and it is not consolidated or is not separated from the limb by the heat, then you must know that there is a delay in the healing of the little things so that you must keep the wound covered with tension.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those delays those that remain are extracted, those that have not been extracted cause pain to the limb and make it painful, pierce to insert them as you can
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If swelling or redness occurs on the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is usually a sign of festering, or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction, for which the narrative preceding this one in the preceding chapter provides a cure.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	When the swelling is great, it is necessary to leave the limb as it is, along with the attendants and the stretcher, and do not presume to extract it, for this would cause death; let it rest until it softens naturally, which will take approximately twenty days or more.</end_of_turn> And thus the swelling will be cured if you leave it alone, and if you do not leave it alone.</end_turn>
Capitol .xx.	Chapter twenty.</end_turn>
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Concerning the treatment of swelling that occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.</end_turn>
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These swelling arises from the putrefaction of the bone in the aftermath of healing from a fracture, and is especially harmful to the joints, and is often the cause of their stiffness; and it is necessary to prevent the limb from its natural movement.</end_turn
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, if the swelling is recent, administer such medicines as have been shown to be efficacious in other cases, and let it be known that I saw, and heard, and smelled, and observed that these methods were successful in other cases; take some of these medications or all of them, and apply them to the swelling with oil, or vinegar, or alum, and keep it covered with a bandage, and bind it tightly.</end_turn
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the extraction be delayed for a few days; and when it is done, repeat it until the swelling has subsided; or strengthen the lamina of lead downwards, for lead has the property of healing all that is swollen in the limbs.</end_turn
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Even if the swelling is already solidified and hardened, and necessity compels you to extract it, do so cautiously, and only remove the soft parts, leaving the solid parts untouched; and close the wound and care for it until it has healed.</end_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter twenty-one.</end_turn
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Concerning the restoration of a fractured bone when it has healed and when the limb is left stiff and painful contrary to its natural tendency.</end_turn
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has healed, and when the limb is left stiff and painful, the following are not useful: multiple treatments for ligament and tendon laxity that has become excessive; excessive rigidity of the ligaments, which hinders the proper nourishment of the limb; excessive inflammation; abnormal movements at an inappropriate time; and general weakness of the patient and debility.</end_turn
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to feed the patient and make them comfortable until their strength returns; give them baths; and, if necessary, provide medical care and instruct them.</end_turn
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And keep the limb still to prevent the accumulation of pus, which would impede the circulation of nourishment, or continue to bandage the limb with warm water, until the nourishment returns to its natural state.</end_turn
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter twenty-two.</end_turn
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Concerning the treatment of fractured bones when they have been restored without any twisting, and the prevention of their further operation by any means whatsoever.</end_turn
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a fractured limb has already undergone restoration, it is necessary to prevent further twisting and swelling of the fractured bone and the surrounding area; however, it is not necessary to prevent the limb from performing its natural movements, as long as you do not cause further damage to the limb itself.</end_turn
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Indeed, many foolish doctors and restorers have caused great harm in this matter; and this operation is dangerous, causing great fear of death.</end_turn
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the swelling and redness are recent, it is necessary to cover them with warm water in which there are many herbs that have a soothing effect, such as chamomile and rue, meadowsweet, and ivy; or apply plaster of Paris with a soft dressing or with gypsum or oil of thyme; or take figs and barley and chamomile, or consume poppy seeds and bruise them with cocks feathers, and resemble those medicines that are not harmful to consolidation.</end_turn
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And many physicians dissolve it with constant rubbing that is too rough, and with the administration of movements to the limb at all hours.</end_turn
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the swelling has already gone down and has become firm and converted, and if it is necessary to treat it with force, the pus must be drained and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved, and the cause of the swelling must be treated, which is a subtle inflammation of the surrounding tissues, and this must be remedied by applying a solution that is appropriate for the condition.</end_turn
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	When there is displacement of the limb.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A displacement of any limb joint, which is prohibited from movement, and which causes pain and great lesions.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perforate (make an incision) in order to reduce it, and do it without delay, for if it is delayed, the limb is swollen and the dislocation is more difficult to reduce
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And do not keep your hand too tight during the reduction, because it can cause spasm and pain
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this has happened, then you must lie down the patient, and put the limb into water which is lukewarm and oily, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all the limb must be treated with the water from which the memory remains in its limb.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And thus we have completed the capitols of dislocation in the order in which they are preceded by fracture; from the upper part of the body downwards
Capitol .xxiiii.	End of document.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatment for dislocation of the jaw bone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The two mandibles are displaced if they are not taut; and the dislocation of both is common in two ways: that they are rigidly fixed in their places for little displacement, or that they are completely displaced and complicated, until they are softened at the junction where saliva flows from the patient’s mouth and they cannot open their mouth or swallow, and their tongue is swollen in their throat
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	If the dislocation is slight, it returns by itself without any cause
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and complicated, it is necessary to perform a reduction immediately.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The minister should hold the patient’s head, and the doctor should insert his thumb of the affected limb into the crease of the dislocation of the mandible outwards from the mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or he should insert his two thumbs together if the dislocation is of two parts, and the other hands tell him which of the limbs must be moved; and the patient should stop moving his jaws and should not move from any part; and the doctor should grasp the mandible and reinsert it into its place
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, and above all if both jaws are simultaneously displaced, the physician should administer evaporation with lukewarm water and oil, until it is sufficient to facilitate the reduction of both without delaying the reduction of both too much, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	When they have returned and are softened, close the patient’s mouth and do not soften it; pause over those particles of matter in the corners, and apply wax and oil; and hold firmly with ease
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Let the patient lie down on his two thighs, and support his head between two pillows, so that he does not move either to the right or the left; do not force him to swallow; have him keep his tongue still, until when the pain has subsided and the jaws are not displaced, you can order him to open his mouth again
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the patient’s mouth except for eating and drinking and spitting, until the mandible is healed and restored
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are displaced at any time and are not converted to their proper places, the physician must take measures which cause fever and excessive sweating, and is likely to alert the patient’s belly, and is likely to cause vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And in such a case, the physician should know that it is a loss; and that he should not attempt to do what is lost in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	End of document
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Treatment for dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the muscle
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not displaced from the latus because of its continuity with the toes; and some are displaced to the outside, and this is declared by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration is that the patient grasps his two thighs and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And hold the limb with your palm with great pressure, so that it returns to its place
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And now stop over that ointment and powder and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which is causing the pain remain fixed and continue in that place; let it not be dislocated at any time; for it is necessary that it be reduced and made even as we have said before and as is fitting for your appearance.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And now stop over that ointment, powder, and traction, and command the patient to remain calm and quiet until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this manner the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its socket.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxvi.	(The text ends here)</start_of_turn>
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.</start_of_turn>
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	It is known that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the part of the tibia to the part beyond.</start_of_turn
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from the part below the muscle, and that is sufficient; it is not dislocated at the back by the scapula; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.</start_of_turn
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most frequently it is dislocated outwards beyond the tibia, and more so in those in whom the flesh is scanty, while it is dislocated with difficulty in those in whom there is much flesh; for in these latter it is more difficult to reduce it.</start_of_turn
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it is often seen in these cases that a man has struck his limb with a blow or by chance, and the muscle of it is protruded from its socket, and is reduced by that which has already been said to be necessary.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore you must stay until you are certain that it is well reduced, and then proceed with the treatment of it.</start_of_turn
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of the muscle is when it is beyond the tibia; so that you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, for you will find among these various appearances; and you will find at the head of the muscle a concavity facing towards the tibia as if there were a ball, and the patient is not able to reduce their hand to the socket or to move it in any way.</start_of_turn
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or from below, and you find it manifested on the touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation it is sufficient to make a gentle reduction when the patient is fresh and the physician is young.</start_of_turn
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the limb above the knee; and immediately place the toes behind the tibia of the limb and elevate the joint to its socket with strength, and the minister raises the limb and extends it outwards; and immediately pause that so that it returns naturally.</start_of_turn
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if it does not return as we have said, and if it has been from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, for several days, the patient must be bathed in warm water and be administered embrocation which softens and lubricates as if it were composed of salt of high degree, and rue, and melilot in water, and be administered.</start_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And immediately the patient should be placed lying down on the bed and be kept still from the knee downwards until the limb is equal between elevation and tension, and the physician should place their hand over the heel of the limb and raise the head of the muscle with force, and pull the patient's hand so that it is not bruised at the lower parts, and another minister should hold the head of the limb, so that it is not bruised at the lower parts, for both these things must return to the socket.</start_of_turn
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and that you make yourself to be present a man who is longer than the patient, and that he stands on that side, and interpose the knee of the muscle between the tibia of the patient and elevate the tibia to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand away from the lower parts of the thigh.</start_of_turn
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is flexible, it is necessary that another cause be suspended, for so will this be more likely that the dislocation will return.</start_of_turn
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced easily in another manner: and that a long staff be placed on the ground whose head is rounded like a mortar pestle, which is neither thick nor thin, and that it be placed under the patient; for when it is placed over the head of the staff the patient is standing according to the length of the staff, and the hand is extended outwards from the other side; and the body of the limb is extended from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to the socket quickly.</start_of_turn
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If reduction proves difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: take a fistful of the quantity that is as long as two barleycorns and as wide as four fingers, and let its bulk be relaxed in the palm of the hand following this fashion:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	If reduction proves difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: take a fistful of the quantity that is as long as two barleycorns and as wide as four fingers, and let its bulk be relaxed in the palm of the hand following this fashion: place the thumb and four fingers over the rounded top of the fist so that the fist does not damage the patient.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	If reduction proves difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: take a fistful of the quantity that is as long as two barleycorns and as wide as four fingers, and let its bulk be relaxed in the palm of the hand following this fashion: place the thumb and four fingers over the rounded top of the fist so that the fist does not damage the patient. Keep the patient's chest still and extend your hand or arm over the fist within the patient's parts, and bind the fist over the adjutorium and arms and the extremity of the hand.</end_of_turn>
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	If reduction proves difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: take a fistful of the quantity that is as long as two barleycorns and as wide as four fingers, and let its bulk be relaxed in the palm of the hand following this fashion: place the thumb and four fingers over the rounded top of the fist so that the fist does not damage the patient. Keep the patient's chest still and extend your hand or arm over the fist within the patient's parts, and suspend the other limb from the other side, so that the joint is relaxed throughout.</end_of_turn>
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the intestine or hernia has been completed according to any possible way, then stop. Keep your hand still over the chest and prepare a plaster with powdered alum and herbs over all the muscles, even if it is rotated downwards, and then tighten the intestines with a tight binding; the ligament should be rotated over the plaster, and the hand should be fixed to the patient's collarbone, and be left for a while. Do not move the patient's hand for seven days.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And keep the patient's diet light until the limb is comforted, for it is more conducive to recovery.</end_of_turn>
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And keep the diet given somewhat more than usual for seven or eight days; or exercise some movement. Therefore if it is kept still and not relieved, it is already healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	More so if the joint is dislocated somewhat by moisture that happens to it or by some other cause, then it is necessary to administer cautery three times, as it is said above.</end_of_turn
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and seven days have passed since the treatment was begun, if the ligament has not been healed and the joint is not stopped, and if the plaster and the tightening are reduced over it every day, and if it is not stopped and cast and cannot raise the limb above its parts, it is known that the nerves of the limb, which are at the head of the muscle, are already insensitive or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never be fixed in place forever.</end_of_turn
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	As for the dislocation of the foot or ankle or the heel or the lower parts, the reduction is successful with a sudden impulse and extension of the limb, until it returns.</end_of_turn
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other tightening be administered in this way, and take care of it until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if by chance the natural healing of the limb is delayed due to gravity in the limb and its tardiness in movement, then the physician should use hot packs until that gravity is relieved and the limb returns to its original state.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of ankle dislocation.</end_turn
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the ankle joint is dislocated with difficulty and almost returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated in all parts, and more so in the part towards the heel, and the dislocation of the limb is not hidden from you because it is evident either because it is left unattended or because it is grasped according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when the ankle joint is adjusted and the dislocation is released from the limb, that is to say when it is declared to you, that the joint is flattened and cannot bend the limb, or touch anything of that sort.</end_turn
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And that you must hold the ankle still, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible before the callous comes back, for if you see the callous come back, the reduction will be difficult, and will not be successful of anything; and more so if it is towards the heel, for it is worse of all other kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many veins are torn in that area which must be held still in order to die.</end_turn
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the limb, when that which is possible is to extend the hand of the limb downwards twice as much, expand the arms of the limb, and place the hands of the physician over the ankle and under the limb, and the plaster the joint with the nails of the thumb and the four fingers of the hand, or with the edge of the palm towards the joint until it returns to its place.</end_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	May it be that if dislocation is towards the front, then return it in such a way that you bend your hand with your other hand, until you pierce the fold with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to the reduction, then administer violent extension and strong traction.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants extend the arms, and hold the patient's limbs so that they do not suffer from the traction
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then revolve the limbs throughout their extent, since it is enveloped in skin doubled along the hand or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that with some oil so that these causes may be eliminated which help to lubricate the joint and facilitate; and then push the joint forcefully until it returns
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then make the reduction firm so that it is fixed over the embolus in which there is stypticity and exudate with an album of blood, and extend it with stricture descending, and suspend the arm from the collar, and leave it for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then remove the dressing; and therefore if the joint is formed in the flesh, the doctor tears the ligament of the limb and leaves that alone
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint is not healed, the doctor repeats the packing and the ligament, and leaves that for several days until it is extruded; and then remove that.</start_of_turn>
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	May it be that if these things happen to it during the reduction of the joint, and the situation is in movement, then administer moisture in oil and coarse friction, and support, until it is relieved; or rest upon the joint without any fatty substance; and then bind it, and leave that on the limb and night.</start_of_turn>
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And do the same with that, and put it in oil; and when it swells, the doctor should cool the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat over that relieved, so is rhythmic movement, once, twice, and thrice.</start_of_turn
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already arrived at the innermost parts of the bath, within that it is limited.</end_of_turn>
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, rest upon that wound of the moist cow and cover it with lint around the border and stretch over that; and make some compresses, which are moist and reduce it to its situation.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the care of dislocation of a limb, that is between the arm and the hand.</start_of_turn
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A limb that is excessively painful is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of the limb is light, unlike other joints, however it is necessary to have speed in the reduction of the limb at the time when it is dislocated, because the limb is apostematized or that something has happened to it during the apostematization.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation of the limb is that you place the thumb of the patient on a table and the doctor extends the limb, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the imminent part of the joint, and pushes that until it returns to its proper place.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However it must be considered if the palm is already bent inward of the hand, the doctor must place two fingers of the patient on a table beside the extension and the reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, the doctor must place two fingers of the hand on the table, so that the hand of the doctor covers that imminent part of the joint.</start_of_turn
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns well, that is good; and if not, the doctor must strengthen that with packing yielding the apostematization and leave that alone; do not repeat that, for if you do, you will suffer or will not succeed in the reduction of the limb except that many days have passed.</start_of_turn
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However the joint remains according to its stiffness; and do not note to the patient any cause, but that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened against any cause; the doctor must know that the nerves are torn or crushed, and that it is not strained in it except that it is strengthened with a pointed cautery and is firm as much as the cause confers.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the limb is returned, the doctor pauses over it the packing that has been recommended, and it is left and strengthened for five days; and then it is removed and left, and the hand is exercised.</start_of_turn
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However if its movement is delayed and something happens to it in any gravity, the doctor should cool that with cold water and with some compresses, until it is relieved.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.</start_of_turn
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	From the care of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some veins are dislocated throughout the fingers.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger of those two at the palm or at the belly of them is dislocated, then it is said to be stiff and it urges the dislocation back to its place until it returns
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until it is equal in that same day
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, bind that according to that narration, and do not stop loosening that in the day and exercising with movement, and bind that at night; do this for several days until it is healed
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Do the same with what was said before, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and bind that part to that place and do what was said before regarding the first operation, until it is healed
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	End of document
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	From the care of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens that any vertebra of the spine or the pelvis dislocates completely, and some vertebrae remain loose from their places, in such a case there is no cure, for death is hidden under the disease
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of that is that the evacuation of the disease is outside the will, and it cannot be retained; and some veins are softened in some part of the body or two veins of the body or two bones of the body, or one of those; or a vertebra is loosened from its place, which is neither softened nor is it strengthened, and it is useful to remove those to four parts
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that which is loosened at the back is called gelliosis
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The care of these is that you consider if the gelliosis happened in infancy, for in that case neither the cure nor the healing of all is possible
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	More than that, if it be seen by observation or percussion or by feeling that those who knew the Ancient methods of treatment say that they are prolonged, from which indeed the most useful returns; but I have already known that there is a brief one of those that is more useful than the long one, because of my proximity to the understanding of my exposure, to which I have been accustomed and have learned from various instruments of that which I will show you and explain that one.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in gelliosis which happens from the front to the heel, neither the cure nor the healing of that exists; and in the same way in that which it is useful for two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And that one is cured only when it happens in the two bones themselves as I recommend
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the disease be extended over its face over the jaw so that it fills all the surrounding parts so that it does not touch the bones of the foot
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then support the limb so that it is fixed in the earth at the foot of the limb, and another support in the opposite foot in the other foot
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister has the limb, and do not let it be fixed in a fossa; and another minister has the other in that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then cover over the head of the disease and leave the thumbs free; and extend the limb to the limb which is beside the thumb, and bind that to it; and then strengthen the other ligament over the ankles of the foot and its bones; and adjust all the ligaments and bind those to the other limb.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister grasp the limb and extends the ligament to the part of the limb, and do not let the two limbs and the ligaments of the joints in which they are fixed remain loose, but indeed do not fix them as we have said
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or that he places them on a table, and that he adjust on the table the soles of the feet until they return
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, the doctor takes a table of which the width or the length is in the air of three bones, and he digs in the wall of which we have said that it is proper for the disease to be placed a place where the limb of the table intersects
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then he places the palm of the table on the vertebra, and the doctor places the soles of the feet on the other limb, and he pulls until the vertebra is fractured and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish, open the turn which is rotated in the hand; and stay on the ground, place the head of the patient behind the two thighs, the length of which is equal to an arm, and place the head of the patient behind the two knees; and let the length be between each two fingers, and already it is made in every finger that turns, and every one that is fixed on the ground so that it does not become nauseous.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let one finger be round in which the turn is made, and let it be rotated in the two joints of the two fingers.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of these is a joint in which the finger is formed, the length of which is equal to a palm as much as it is rotated; and in the two other fingers it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments that you have stretched in the patient's feet in the area where you placed the head of the foot, and the ligaments that you have stretched in the area of the patient's toes in the turn where you placed the feet
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you must make every turn and keep a minister who will support the turn with his hand, and the doctor will stabilize the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the limb is healed, then you must wait a while before you move, and then stop; and place your hand over the bandage of the thumb, which should be as wide as three fingers or more, and as long as it reaches the joint of the knee, and over the part of the spine that is below the joint of the knee to the heel
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the ligament that we have mentioned, and use the patient for a nourishing diet until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the limb at the end of the healing, then you must administer medicines that soften and soothe with the administration of alum for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is administered in that soft paste of lead
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And every time that violent swelling arises behind the vertebrae of the two thighs, it is cured by that dislocation; and that is the bone which has already mentioned that it must not be allowed to become fayta in this way because of this medicine, which makes the limb swell excessively.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the care of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You must know that the ankle joint and the ankle muscle joint do not move only by dislocation, but also by other affections that affect the small bones that cause swelling and concavity
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, which is at the front, at the back, at the top, or at the bottom
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated at the front, and slightly at the top or at the bottom
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	A sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that when you adjust the limb of the healthy ankle with the limb of the patient, the heel is longer and more prominent than the heel of the healthy limb, the ankle cannot bend its knee towards the ground, and the limb can be bent only with difficulty after the cautery is removed because the head of the bone has already passed over here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation at the top is that these bones suffer the opposite of this accident
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation at the bottom is that the limb expands its circumference according to custom, but it does not bend in the painful area; and if it is forced to bend, it cannot do so without great pain; and the urine is retained and the swelling is great, and you must walk the limb on the ankle bone
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation at the back is that it does not expand the heel, nor does it permit bending of the ankle that is bending the swelling, and the limb is shorter than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the bone is over that place
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	More reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, when, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already outdated with the one you have just administered, so do not repeat it; for in this cure there is no need for it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	More in the one where the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you must keep the joint immobile and extend it towards the front and the back, and rather towards the right and left, for the force will return and will not suffer from any other cure
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May be, if he does not return in this manner, that you prepare a strong minister and extend the limb from this side beyond, or from the other side, or ligate that which is liated upon the limb from beneath; and another minister extend the hand of him whom you put on the side of the thigh, so that his thumb rests on the side of the limb; and then tighten the ligature over the root of the limb and hold another minister over the extremity of the ligature.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And be extension of the limb or from the groin to the angle of the hip, or from the back to the side of the thigh.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let the extension of all these be in a straight line until the patient is elevated upon a cushion of earth and remains hanging down
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four limbs
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is well; and if not, it is necessary to take all the means that we said concerning the care of the limb.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the limb itself, when it is dislocated, if the dislocation is at the groin, cover that the patient be placed supine upon the outer thighs; and immediately suspend the ligaments over the root of the limb in that place where between the head of the thigh and the place that is left to hang down; and then extend the limb from the side of the thigh to the highest part of the hip
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And immediately another minister grasps the knees of the limb, and immediately hold the great toe of the painful limb and extend to the other side for violent extension, so that that which returns to the hip socket.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this is the milder cure for which this limb is reduced than the others
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Or if it is excused by you and you do not obey the order concerning this method of cure, it is necessary that both feet of the patient be bound together with a strong ligature, with care, above both ankles and above both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and let the painful limb be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And immediately suspend the limb above the head of the thigh and that it is in the middle; and let the length of the limb from the earth be the quantity of two thighs.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And immediately command a strong youth to reduce the head of the thigh, and that another youth suspend the limb, and the other youth grasp the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to the hip socket quickly
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction itself, when it is dislocated at the hip, cover that the patient grasp about the knee according to what we have recommended in the previous paragraph; and tighten the ligament over the painful limb itself and over the toes of the limb
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And immediately two cushions are placed, one under the foot of the limb, and the other under the head; and immediately adjusted cushions are placed under the middle of the thigh resting upon which a damp cloth is wrapped, so that the limb is not dampened because the thigh is between the thighs of the patient, so that the extension to the lower parts is not too violent
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And immediately every minister extends his part, and the doctor with his hand grasps the reduction according to the art
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey respectfully, it will be well greatly; and if not, suspend immediately and as diligently as we have said concerning the engagement of that limb.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And cover that the patient grasps about the buttocks as much as possible.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the hip, cover that the limb be extended lightly, as is said in the preceding narration concerning the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand upon the painful limb, and immediately grasps that with the other hand, and with that grasp suspends that extended to the lower parts towards the heel
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary that the limb be extended to the lower parts, but it is elevated upon the earth; having covered that it should be held with force, just as if the hip joint were dislocated at the hip, as we have said concerning the engagement of the limb for two fingers; and it is over its face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, without haste.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover that a compress be administered with a board upon the place where the joint is located.<end_turn>
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore when the reduction is completed as we have said — and the signal of the reduction of the limb is not hidden from you, that you extend both limbs of the patient, and when you have once performed those compressions and the patient pulls the thigh limb and expands that relaxation, you will know that the limb is returned as we have said — and then you adjust two cushions and hold together and pull with a bandage so that the thigh is not bruised in any part; and keep the patient quiet for three days or for four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the ligament and the dressing, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When, however, you see that the swelling has subsided in the limb, it is understood that the dislocation has already stopped, and now you can allow the patient to walk again.</end_of_turn>
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if there is any suspicion of an embolism, then return immediately and place that [finger or instrument] there, and withdraw that according to your first assessment, and leave that for three days.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that [finger or instrument], and make the patient walk slowly for several days until comfort is achieved.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxii.	(End of text)</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Note: The provided text appears to be the end of the medical treatise, with the concluding sentence reading "De curacio de dislocacio del denolh" (Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the ankle).
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways: when the ligaments are torn outwards, when they are torn inwards, and when the ligaments are torn both above and below; but not when they are torn only downwards.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is when the patient applies pressure to the limb with his hand; when this happens, it is understood that the ankle is dislocated.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	As for the restoration of all these positions, make the patient lie down and raise his limb as high as he can; then bind the limb firmly two fingers away from the toes; place the patient’s foot between the thighs; and hold the ankle firmly against the toes over the ankle joint, and keep those fingers tightly bound for a while until the ankle returns to its place.</end_of_turn
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery is when the limb hangs limply without pain when the limb is lifted.</end_of_turn
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then place that [finger or instrument] back and make the limb adhere to the limb, and bind those two together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove those.</start_of_turn
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.</end_of_turn
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Even if the dislocation has been reduced, it is necessary to strengthen the ligaments that were damaged during the treatment of the swelling beforehand.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of treatise.</start_of_turn>
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Note: This concludes the medical treatise, with the final sentence reading "De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo" (Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the ankle).</start_of_turn
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle joint is sometimes sprained due to a slight displacement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation can be either upwards or downwards.</start_of_turn
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells as a result of the displacement.</start_of_turn
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for displacement is to promote a gradual recovery, and to keep the limb slightly bent with the greatest ease and to reduce the swelling until it disappears.</start_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the dislocation is complete, make the patient lie down, and support that side of the ankle with a strong and valiant hand from behind the two toes of the limb.</start_of_turn
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And hold the limb firmly with your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand on the lower part of the foot, at the ankle joint.</start_of_turn
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards your right hand, and then towards the left for two spans, and then extend it again; and bind the toes of the foot to the right side of the bandage.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this for two spans as we have counted.</start_of_turn
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And bind the toes of the foot to the bandage for the third span, and you are at the ankle.</start_of_turn
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one span or two according to this manner, and if sometimes the foot swells, it is good; otherwise, if it does not return, repeat the operation until it returns.</start_of_turn
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Even if the reduction of the ankle is forbidden in this case, make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, and let him rest on the ground, and place a cushion under the patient’s thighs, and keep him there until the patient has regained consciousness.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The attendants should hold the patient’s limbs firmly and extend the foot with the greatest ease or with the help of the ligament that lies over the ankle bone; and extend the other limb as much as possible, but keep the cushion between the patient’s thighs in order not to irritate the limb.</start_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor grasps the dislocation at the hip joints, while another attendant holds the sound limb at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And thus, when the dislocation has returned and you have declared the soundness of the reduction, then pause the plaster and remove that which has been bound tightly, and join the limb to the limb at the bandage.</end_of_turn>
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And take care that you fear or guard the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the ligament over that is not taut and that the limb is not tightly bound.</end_of_turn>
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then keep it bandaged for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, remove that.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the fourth day or the fifth, remove that, and prohibit the patient from eating for forty days.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it be necessary to go forward again that space, it is not harmful for safety that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that you do not give it any cure.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if indeed it happens that the dislocation has progressed to the heel, then cover that you administer in the cessation of the pain that precedes our narration, in another place of cure and bandaging, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the bones of the foot.</end_of_turn>
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Take that which is dislocated and grasp it with little extension, because that which is not difficult, prevents infection.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if the dislocation is in the ankle bones of the two feet, then cover that you keep the patient sitting on the bed or on a table, and that he stays like this as if he were going.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then put your foot on the ground, and stop the heel of the foot from resting on what you imagine of the joints, and hold that which is over the heel until it returns, and that you see that it is already healed and does not reappear in the imminent location.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place under the foot of the patient a board that will encompass the whole foot, which has two caps, and hold that which is over the structure downwards and firmly for three days; and then remove that and make the patient walk again after so many days, until it is healed and the recovery is ensured.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.</end_of_turn
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocation that are caused by inflammation or fracture or by some other injury.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of these has occurred, and you are taking care of the treatment of that and the restoration of it, the following things must succeed in order to avoid death.</end_of_turn
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that we do not presume that on the treatment of that we should rely only on the art, of long experience, of mercy and humility, tardiness, not arrogance or presumption; and that he use at the beginning of medicines that do not cause additional damage, and that he refer the patient to the divine judgment, rather than to that to which you hope for salvation from loss, from relief of the disease, and in which any hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore strive as much as possible to bring about the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before the damage has progressed.</end_of_turn
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that will cause gentle swelling and care for the inflammation in that which you consider necessary for the healing of the wound desiccation.</end_of_turn
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is caused by a fractured bone of the heel separated from the rest, then you break the ligament of those and do what we have said in the simple diseases of what precedes these.</end_of_turn
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And keep and abstain according to your virtue that which pertains to fear according as you are preceded by my prediction; for what is better for you than to have recourse to the Creator? More lasting is your glory, and more worthy of praise is the true God in the true time.</end_of_turn
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the book of Albucasim perfectly praising God who is good in all things.</end_of_turn>
Amen.	Amen.</end_of_turn>
