of the hair that pricks the eye
Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes are turned inwards, and prick the eye, and cauteries are made there in two ways:
that is to say with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your lap;
then draw on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs;
then place cotton moistened with egg white and psyllium mucilage on the eye, then heat the cautery, which has this shape:
Then cauterize over the figure you have marked little by little, many times, so that the flesh is burned there;
and the sign of the success of the operation is that you see the eyelid retracted and the hairs raised at the corner of the eye;
then remove your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter there until the burn is healed;
afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs return and the eyelid is softened, then repeat the cautery over the same spot, as you did the first time;
and if the hairs are burned away, cauterize it until the eyelid is raised to its natural position and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf;
then take French soap and quicklime, an ounce of each, and grind them well together;
and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid;
And if the patient has it in one eye only, you should work on one, and if in both, also;
and place under the eye cotton moistened in egg white;
and the patient's head should be in your lap and put your index finger on the medicine, and press it a little and move it every time the patient feels a burning from the medicine, for it feels like a burning fire.
When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your finger.
And when the burning has passed, lift up the moistened area and see if you notice the growth elevated as if it had been raised by the use of fire or by an incision;
and if it is so, it is good.
If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your mark is precise;
then apply cotton moistened with butter until the burned area falls off, afterward treat the area with the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And you must take great care in your work, ensuring that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the paper softens afterward, and the hairs prick the eye, then reapply the medicine to the softened area of the paper neatly, just as you did before;
afterward treat it until it is healed;
and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
And know that people's eyes vary in size, and your restraints should be adjusted accordingly;
and the right way is not set forth for the one who studies this art.
