of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs in thick places near the back, and at the end inside, and they only bend because they are slippery;
and one feels it well by examination with the fingers.
And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint, if you need to.
And if the rib fracture is pointing inwards, the patient feels very great pain, and a pricking sensation, like pleurisy, because the bone pricks the membrane;
and breathes with difficulty, and coughs and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is a serious condition, and the ancients have put much effort into it.
And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
We do not do this, so that hot abscesses do not develop there, if they have not already appeared.
And if they have appeared, then treat them.
And some of them said that one should place cupping glasses on the area, to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable;
however, there is concern that the cupping glass may attract excess fluids to the area due to its weakened state.
And some of them said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil, and tents should be placed between the ribs to make the place even all around, then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the skin, and there is concern for the patient, then it is necessary to cut over the location of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the peritoneum;
and then one should cut the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses develop, then apply cloths soaked in rose oil, and place them on the area;
and meanwhile treat the area as appropriate for an abscess, and let him lie often on the side where he should, until he is healed.
