The chapter on abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, as will be recalled later in this book, one after another, and they differ in perforation and in incision;
and this is in two ways, one of which is in its appearance itself, and in that it holds moisture.
And the second way is because of the places where they are on the body.
For an abscess of the head is different from one of the buttocks, and an abscess of a fleshy place is different from one that occurs in the joints, and each has its own treatment in practice.
And there are abscesses that one should not pierce, until the pus is ripe according to its maturation;
and there are some that must be pierced when they are raw, and do not ripen according to their maturation, such as abscesses that are near joints.
For when an abscess develops near the joints, and it is left until it rots around it, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is ripened, it will harm the principal member;
or it is near the anus, so it is pierced before it is ripe;
and you should not pierce a raw abscess without complete digestion, except for the one that is near the anus, so that it does not rot deeply inside, and become elongated within, and a fistula develops there;
and cannot heal for a long time.
And you must know the time for the piercing of the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the throbbing and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you should make the perforation in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears soft;
and the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all similar places where there is no bending.
In those that bend, along the length of that limb.
And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before that, the body of the poison will be elongated, and it is full of much filth;
and perhaps the edges and the depths of it will harden.
And there are some abscesses that are pierced along the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
And you must manage, with small abscesses, small openings;
and with large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess;
and there are some abscesses where it is necessary to shave the core and cut;
when it has become yellow like a cloth, and is dead, one must do as one does with buboes:
and there are some that are split into three angles, and there are some that are cut like a myrtle leaf, like abscesses of the groin; 
and there are some where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those that have no head, such as a soft superficial abscess, you must pierce completely;
and when the abscess is large, and it has collected a lot of pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that time, but draw out a part;
then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again;
do this many times, little by little, until all the pus comes out;
especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or a decrepit old man.
For the spirit sometimes leaps out with the exit of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound and see if the wound of the abscess is small;
and if it is a full incision, then administer tents of linen or old cotton;
and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must put a tent in each one so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have lifted it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloths without moisture, and tie it up until the third day;
then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, then administer cold water and vinegar, and wet a cloth, and place it on the bleeding area several times.
And if the bleeding continues, administer treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in many places in this book, and if it is in winter, and the area where the abscess is located is very sensitive, then you must put on tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil;
and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, you should apply cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then open the abscess and drain it and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
And this should be universally understood in the treatment of abscesses:
Now I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
