of the pain in the hip
When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have described in the section and the treatment is ineffective, and the illness is chronic:
then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other similarly good pills.
Afterwards, apply cautery;
and the method of cautery is as follows, in two ways:
that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is this:
that you cauterize on the point of the hip, three triangular cauteries in this form, and make them good and deep and wide, and have between each cautery a space the width of a finger, and the cautery should be olive-shaped;
sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle, on the top of the hip, therefore there are four, in this form:
And if you wish, cauterize it with the circular cautery that we mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.
And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip, and doesn't reach down to the thigh or the leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle, four fingers up, slightly to the left side; 
and the cautery should be knife-shaped, and burn through the thickness of the flesh;
And if the patient feels the pain extending to the toes of the foot or nearly so, cauterize where they feel the pain, three or four points with the cautery called "point cautery".
And if necessary, make more;
And if it is known that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, make a cautery with the knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery in so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient further harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have made cauteries on the ankle of the foot, and left them in so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and the entire foot was pierced and corrupted.
After a bowel movement, from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this method.
And the wise men said regarding the cautery of the hip, of which this is the method: make such an iron and let it be at the tip as thick as the fingernail of a thumb, or a little less, and let it be serrated and let it be from one serration to the other a distance the size of a thumb knuckle;
and let the serrations be angled on two sides, and let them be like knots, and let there be a well-made iron handle;
and this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red and throws off sparks, and then place it on the buttock of the afflicted hip, and turn it onto the healthy side;
and cauterize it once with a round cautery and leave it for three days;
and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it;
and yet this is one of the good cauteries, for those who can bear it, and where it is appropriate.
The cautery of burning medicine is made with an instrument with openings into which the edge of the opening descends, and it should be of brass or iron with a long side, and at the top it should have two knots, and between each the width of a finger;
and they should be open below and above, and joined together in this way:
Then place it on the buttock of the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand firmly on the buttock;
then pour between the two rings hot water that has been heated on the fire for a while, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and the burning from it.
For it finds there a mortification as if by fire;
and when the mortification has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and wash the buttock with fresh water, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burn is removed;
and leave it three days so that the pus comes out;
and this would be the final treatment after the application of ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds water just as you did for the buttock;
and this is the method for hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
where there is a small hole below so that the point of a razor can enter;
and place another well-sealed pot on top of this pot, and put alkali and lime and fresh water on top, until there is a finger's width above the powders when you have pressed it well with your hand;
and leave it like this until sharp water descends and falls into the sealed pot, then take all this water, and throw it onto lime and alkali as before.
And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many medical procedures and in cauterizations of other limbs.
For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well, such as orpiment and anacardic honey and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment with which a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and praises it highly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in a single instance when this treatment was performed, and he had bathed as he instructs below.
And says in this manner that you take fresh, dry green litharge, and grind it well with a little fat, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it;
and leave it for three hours, or as long as it takes until the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little moistened, and have him go to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with such medicines, unless it is after the body has been evacuated.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps a lot;
and the cautery should be done in this way.
Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe and the next one, which is called foscile.
Then take dry goat dung and ignite it until it becomes coals, and put it on the wool, and leave it there until it is extinguished;
and do it again this way, and do not stop doing so until you think, by reason, that it reaches the hip, and that the pain has ceased;
and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery".
