of the various types of fractures
There are many types of fractures, and various forms, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures that are made by the blow of a sword, and the blow removes all the bone down to the syfac which is under the bone, as an axe or wood does; and therefore this type of fracture is called "hachure" (axe-like).
Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this type of fracture is called "absolue" (complete); and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is a blunt percussion, or a split or a blow from a stone, or from falling on a stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a piercing fracture, which reaches down to the membrane which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is also a wound that is placed in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and therefore this fracture is called "capillaire" (hairline); and also the wound which is made either by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter downwards, and the place is sunken as cauldrons do when struck; thus the stone enters inside. 
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like a child's head; and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated like splinters; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all types of fractures by the indentation above them, and the probing with tents, and by the corrupted flesh that is on top.
The similar hairline fracture is recognized because when the bone has been uncovered, and one rubs ink on it, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of the fracture, pay attention to the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, and loss of consciousness, and stretching, and inflammation, and acute fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar ones in several dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt. 
And if you see no alarming accident, and you expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded first comes to you, and it is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, as early as you can.
And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the tissue under the bone is corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must cut the fractured part like this: and that is, you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as gently as you can, and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or a hot abscess, help him with what is necessary, and that is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed, and you are sure of the bleeding; then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done according to two methods of work: one way is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then make another incision larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of Indian steel; and work lightly, so that you do not injure the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, you must pierce it around, before you make incisions with drills, not so deep that they pierce through the skull bone, and it should have a margin or a circle on the tip, which prevents the point from passing through the bone; and you must have several of them, so that each one comes to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for every head; and this is the form of the three types of drills:
The method for piercing around the fractured bone is that you place a drill on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then place the drill elsewhere a little further on, and so do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of bone that is between the holes, and do this as delicately as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone with your hand, or with some of the instruments that you have, such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, you must cut the remaining bone fragment with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incisor; and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have described.
And the other method of working is the one that Galen describes, which is safer; and he praises it very highly, and these are his words.
You must first uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears most, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under it the head of this lenticular incisor, of which this is the form:
And it does not cut on one side, and the part is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet on it, so that you cut the bone lightly all around, and take good care of the membrane that is underneath; if it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed well without harm, and without fear. 
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut on the surface, and there are small pieces, you must scrape this roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you must have various sizes, to use in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
So scrape first with large scrapers, and then with finer ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-thin cuts and fine fractures, you must apply treatment according to its correction; and this is a thing not revealed to one who has not applied his study to this art.
And if the meninges are exposed, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth folded in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so as not to aggravate the meninges, then apply another bandage over it, and do not tighten it except enough to hold the wound only; and leave it like this for a day or two, until the inflammatory swelling has subsided, then untie it, and apply medications such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and make a powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and always apply cleansing medications without causticity; and ensure that the wound is always clean, that you do not leave the ointment there, nor let pus collect, for when pus collects on the membrane of the brain, it corrodes and rots it, and great harm comes to the patient; for when something caustic is put on the meninges, it blackens on top. 
Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful.
And if blackness appears only because of the medicine that was applied, which has such a property, then you must take one part honey, and three parts rose oil and soak a cloth in it, and place it on the meninges; then treat it with the appropriate methods of treatment until it is healed.
