of scrofula
Often these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous and intertwined with each other.
And each scrophulous swelling is properly within its own membrane, like the kernel and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
and the variations of these scrofulous swellings are many.
There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
In the one that you see to be of good disposition to the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and movable on all sides and is not near the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the throat, and is not deep;
you should cut it from above, and peel it on each side, and spread the two lips of the core with hooks, if you need them, as we have said for abscesses of the head;
and pull it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and the spatula should not be sharp or pointed, so that the hand does not slip, and does not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and this prevents you from working, put ground vitriol into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and compress the wound;
and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood is stopped, return to your work, until you have completed it;
then search with your index finger if any small scrofulas remain, then cut and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut this scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm;
then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut the entire scrofula, you must bring the two edges of the wound together, and sew them immediately, then make sure there is no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula.
you must take care to cut the root of it, and draw out fire, and sew it as we have said.
Those scrofulas that contain excess fluid, pierce them where they appear ripe;
and pierce it like the one mentioned before, downwards, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it dissolves what remains of the corrupted matter;
and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with ointment generating flesh, until it is healed.
