of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "radius" bones, of which one is small, and this is the one that follows the thumb;
and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little finger;
perhaps the large radius bone is broken alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small radius bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more serious than when they are both broken together.
If it is the small radius bone that is broken alone, it should be extended a little, lightly, and set evenly.
And if it is the large radius bone, it must be extended more strongly;
and extend it on a cushion, and hold the ball of the hand higher than the rest, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be propped up on himself, with a cushion in front of him, higher up, so that the patient doesn't suffer any strain;
then let the practitioner extend his arm on the underside of his hand, or with a cord, and another practitioner on the other side above.
And then let the physician set it evenly, according to its best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if there is any separated that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut open and remove it, as we have said before.
And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken of it in the individual chapter;
then undertake the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration hot abscesses arise, then glue on a cloth of cerate made with rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; 
and tie a cloth over it delicately, until the hot abscess is soothed.
And then remove the cerate, and apply a poultice of mill dust with plenty of egg, then apply the splints, and the splint for the fracture should always be stronger, and a little wider than the others;
and know that there should be six splints on the arm in several positions:
whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
and the bandages that are over the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and the thread with which it is tied should be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And examine the limb and the bandage after a few days.
And if any adverse event occurs to the limb, such as itching, then you must bathe the limb with warm water, until the itching is soothed;
and let the limb rest, not tightly bound.
And then resume the bandaging, and if the bandage is loose and the bone separated, or similar thing, then adjust it.
And take care if nourishment cannot reach the limb, because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little, and leave it thus for a few days, until the nourishment flows there, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, do not unbind it for up to twenty days.
or thereabouts, then he hangs his hands around his neck, and his neck should be straight, and he should avoid movement and restlessness, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the humors.
