Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
We told you in the first chapter every illness where cautery by fire, or burning medicine, is necessary, and the occasions and the causes and the instruments and the methods of cauterization;
and I have arranged this chapter from head to toe, and I will continue in this chapter in the same manner so that one can more easily find what one desires.
And before I begin this, dear son, you must understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly.
For many kinds of people come for treatment.
Thus come some who are so angered by their illness that they die easily because of the fury they find in their sickness, and the greatness of its malice;
and of these one must be wary.
And among these are some who give you their trust and say:
Wait, I am healed";
and the illness is deceptive.
You should not agree with those who come to you with this attitude, but place more value on your honor than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you are certain of, and from which you can gain reward and praise;
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that it leads to healing;
and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and the memory of praise.
Very dear son, Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may He inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before in the chapter on cauteries, which I described to you from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you need.
