of the fistula of the anus
Fistulas that come from below the anus are swellings, and growths that come near the outside of the anus, or in the space between the two parts, and it can be a single fistula or several;
and when this swelling is old, it opens and emits moist white pus or thin excrement, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
and they are recognized because there comes out either excrement or flatulence when the patient defecates, and sometimes a worm comes out.
And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis;
and extend up to the hip joint, and up to the base of the spine.
And thus one recognizes the fistula penetrating the anus, and the non-penetrating one: 
and you put your index finger in the anus, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin lead probe, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger;
and if you don't feel it, and no discharge or flatulence or worms come from the opening, as we have said:
know that it does not penetrate;
so hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, urine will leak out, and it cannot be healed with medicines. 
If it is pierced to the hip joint, then the probe reaches that place;
if there is no tortuosity and the source of the pain is around it, then pus constantly comes out, and neither medicine nor healing ointment is effective;
and in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure but work, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In one that is not penetrating and is not old, there is hope of healing by surgery, as I have experienced, and the patient should lie on their back in your hands;
and lift their legs up to their thighs, and have their thighs bent towards their belly;
then insert a probe of brass, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the probe reaches.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you should insert your index finger there, then feel if the probe has pierced it;
and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the abdominal wall or the flesh, then you know that it is penetrating;
so do not work on it because it cannot be healed.
It is said, however, that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;
and the help that is given is to heat the thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before;
and insert it, very hot, into the fistula, until it reaches near the rectum;
and do this two or three times, until you know that these decayed tissues are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then treat it with tents soaked in butter, until this tissue comes out, then treat it with ointment that generates flesh and heals.
If it is thus healed, that is good.
If not, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the probe enters, and does not reach down to the finger that is in the rectum, and between your finger and the probe there is a thick covering of flesh or tissue, and you see the fistula below that which follows the covering of the heart;
then cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and push the probe further in, and then the cautery after it, until it reaches the end of the probe;
and the probe will be released, and will fall out;
then clean the damaged tissues that resemble a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
And if the blood overcomes you, and flows between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery combines two good things:
that is to say, the burning of this excess flesh, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then treat it with tents soaked in butter or in crushed things, until the place produces pus, and the burnt flesh comes out with the pus;
then treat the wound with generating, drying ointments that produce hard flesh, and these are dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula reaches deep into the anus, and is far from the body, put your finger into the anus and examine it.
If you feel the tent, and between the two is the cloth or the syfac or flesh, or it is close to piercing through, then there is nothing but a path of confidence and hope, by the application of one of the three methods:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, you insert tents and treat it as before;
and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the tissue that holds the anus, and the excrement comes out involuntarily;
then treat it as we have said;
perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the anus, either with a tent or another suitable instrument;
then clean the damaged flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can;
then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the area outside the anus:
thus it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas in this way:
and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is in the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the end in this way:
And put a twisted thread doubled, and put the tent with the thread into the fistula until it is at the end.
If it pierces the edge of the anus inside, then pull the thread out of that hole, so that you put your finger in the anus;
and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and tie one to the other, and leave it for a day or two;
and tighten it sometimes, until the thread cuts the flesh that is between the two, and they fall off;
then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in any way you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not necessary to cut too deeply for the ligature, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the pointed scalpel with which one cuts the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting;
and not on the other, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
