of scrofula
In the head small abscesses arise, and they are like knots which are in webs, like the wattles of a hen, and there are many that are similar.
There are some of them fat and some in which there is moisture like pus;
and there are some which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no danger unless an artery interferes.
And the work of the cutting is that you test with an instrument which is called a "probe," the form of which comes hereafter, what thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then split it lengthwise from above.
And when the moisture is emptied, then flay without leaving anything of the skin that contains this moisture, for it always returns if anything is left;
then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available;
if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day;
and this will corrode what remains of the dead tissue.
And then replace the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that none of the dead tissue remains;
then treat the wound with a suitable ointment, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds a core of fatty substance, cut it along its length, in this way;
and insert your hooks, and peel it away on all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the covering where it lies;
and if the artery gives you trouble, do what I told you afterwards.
And do the same with the abscess if it is stony, both in cutting and treating it as I have told you. 
And the incision on a stony abscess, and a moist one, is easier, because they contain little blood.
And if some of these abscesses are on the head where there is no moisture, as there was one abscess I cut from the head of an old woman; 
and I found the abscess like a rough, coarse, and white stone, and it could not be broken;
and if one had struck it, one would have made a wound in it like in a stone.
In other abscesses occurring on the head, except those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent place, to allow the pus to drain;
and treat them as appropriate.
