of quinsy
The ancients spoke and discussed the incision of the throat;
but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have quinsy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided;
and that no help be given by this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are [affected] in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two tonsils.
When the illness is in the trachea of the lung, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three or four rings, a small transverse incision, between the two rings or by the amount of the incision of the uvula, but not in the cartilage;
and this place is suitable for the incision of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are far from there.
And if the practitioner is fearful, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat with the hook, then cut the flesh until he reaches the trachea;
and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the uvula, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the expulsion of phlegm from the trachea which jumps out through the place that is opened, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time has passed during which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the flesh, and sew it alone without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged near death, and lacks breath.
Then one cuts the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and for this reason the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the danger of the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they instructed to sew the wound and treat it, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw.
I saw a young woman take a knife, and stick it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the lung;
and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood which had come out, and knew well that she had not cut a vein or any vessel but the throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and nothing happened to the young woman except that her voice was hoarse, and later returned to normal;
therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no need for fear.
