Dislocations of the hip
Know that at the hip joints and at the shoulder joints only dislocations occur, not like in other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated in four ways:
inwards and outwards, and forwards and backwards;
and more inwards than elsewhere, and rarely dislocated forwards and backwards.
And the sign of its inward dislocation is that when the injured leg is placed next to the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears higher than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the buttocks;
and the area close by is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the femur comes there.
And the sign of one that dislocates outwards is that these symptoms are opposite to the previous ones.
And the sign of one that occurs forwards is that they can extend their leg fully;
however, they cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make them walk, they cannot move forward, and retain their urine, and the groin swells, and when they walk, they step on their heel.
And the sign of the one that occurs backwards, is that they cannot extend or bend their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the femur is positioned under the ribs.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is such that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains fixed in its position, there is no cure;
and there should be no attempt (to reduce it).
And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four types of dislocations, you must hurry to replace the joint, extending it inwards and outwards, and moving it right and left;
perhaps it will return (to its place), and no other treatment will be needed.
And if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with a strap that is tied above the knee;
and another assistant should extend his hand from above in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens it with a soft band above the thigh;
and another should hold the end of the strap;
and they all extend, upwards and downwards, at the same time, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then a treatment appropriate to its type must be applied.
When the dislocation is inwards, you should lay the patient on his healthy side, then place the strap on the root of the thigh, and the place that is below the groin, then extend the strap upwards towards the groin, and towards the navel;
then have another assistant take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend it outwards strongly:
it will return to its place immediately;
and this type of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot fix it in this way that we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft strap on both heels, and on both knees, and the injured leg should be extended two fingers more than the other;
then let him be hung by the top of a piece of wood, and be two arm-lengths above the ground;
then order an assistant to grasp the top of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who firmly grasps the thigh, for the joint will return to its place quickly and suddenly.
And when the dislocation is in the nape of the neck, the patient should lie down as we have described for someone with gibbosity, and tighten a strap on the affected leg firmly, and on the weight as well;
then place two firebrands, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert a firebrand between the patient's thighs amidst the mold/support;
and have wet cloths placed around it, so that it doesn't injure the patient, then each assistant should stretch towards him, and the physician should set the dislocation evenly with his hand.
If it returns (to its place), that is good.
If not, put (him) on a table, and press as we have described for gibbosity, and have the patient lie on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, one must extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
and the physician should put his effort on the diseased groin, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backwards, one should not extend the patient downwards, nor lift them off the ground, but rather they should be as if the hip were dislocated backwards, as we have said about lying on both hips;
and (the patient) should be on their face, and the limb extended as we have said previously, and one should press on the joint against the table;
and it will be correct when the patient extends their legs, and they are even;
then bring the thighs together, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and (the patient) should rest for three or four days, then unbind it, and apply the plaster again;
and if you see that they are even, bind it as before, and leave it for three days;
then unbind it, and have him walk gently, until the limb is strengthened.
