of the abscess of the nail
A panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other fingers;
and when it is old, and one does not take care of it, a hot abscess arises there, and runs and throws off pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes runs through it all;
and the corrosion reaches the bone, so that there is a foul-smelling pain, and the end of the finger is swollen, and the color is dark.
When you treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment is not effective, then you must cut away with a knife all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick and wound it, then you must place a thread under the nail that pricks the flesh, and lift it up, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove it all;
then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and extract it out, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the finger becoming corrupted, then cut it at one of the joints as described previously, then treat it until it is healed;
And if it is struck and bruised and there is great pain, then you must first bleed it;
then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across the top, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, then apply something soothing.
The pain of the whitlow of the hand
The extra finger which grows on the hands of some men by chance is entirely fleshy, and sometimes there are some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and some of them grow at the base of the joint, where the growth is on certain parts of the fingers.
The one that grows on some part of the finger does not move, and the one that grows at the joint of the finger, by chance moves;
The removal of the one that is fleshy is easy, in this way:
Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The one that grows at the base of the joint is difficult to treat:
so refrain from cutting it.
In the one that grows in the finger at the last joint, you must first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a saw suitable for this, then treat it until it is healed.
The fusion that occurs in the fingers together comes by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by a burn from fire, or by similar things.
You must cut this fusion, so that the fingers return to their natural shapes;
then put between the two spaces tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so they don't fuse back together;
or you put between the two thin pieces of lead, until the place is healed, as is necessary.
If fusion occurs in any of his fingers with the palm, cut this fusion as needed.
