Before we recall the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of help and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help, and of harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and the hidden secret;
and many wise men spoke of this, and agreed on it;
and their words suffice little for me, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that cautery universally helps every complexion where there is matter, except for two complexions:
that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
In a complexion both hot and dry with matter, some debated and said that cautery is a great help there;
and others said the opposite:
that cautery is not good for an illness that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and a hot illness should not be treated with heat, nor with dryness;
and he who said the opposite claimed that cautery is a great help for a hot and dry illness that occurs in the bodies of men.
For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement.
For I have sometimes found it through experience.
And in any case, no one should interfere except those who have experience, and who know through long practice the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the length of time;
We have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the limb that is cauterized, and does not harm other limbs except a little.
Burning medicines spread from limb to limb, and cause diseases in the limb that are difficult to heal;
and perhaps kill the patient.
Fire, because of its loftiness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is excess.
And this I have found for you through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things;
and for this I apologize for the length of the speech, for I do not want to deprive you of the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating it;
therefore receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauterizations should be done, and they chose spring.
And I say that cautery is suitable in all seasons, because the sudden harm is lessened by the help of the cautery;
and especially if the cautery is for necessary, sudden, and urgent pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm might come to the limb.
And do not ever think, dear son, as the foolish physicians do;
for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return;
and they say it thus;
but it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is better than medicine because of the swiftness of its effect, and because of the power of its work and its mastery.
And it is possible that the illness sometimes returns according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature;
and the superfluities are gathered in him by the intake of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered in a place where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as cautery of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cautery is effective after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they are ineffective, then we administer cautery, and it is effective.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is gentler than with iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; 
and they said that the site of the cautery does not suppurate, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some people; 
and gold cautery is better than iron, as they said.
And yet when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot because of the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if it is heated too much;
thus they make in the fire; 
and thus there is enough difficulty.
And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have prepared specifically for our work.
Now I have organized this chapter from head to toe so that the way is easier to find.
