of arrows/arrowheads
Arrows/arrowheads are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they fall.
Their diversity is such that there are some that have large points, and small, and barbed, and solid/unbarbed;
and some that have two barbs, and some that have tongues/blades, and some that are in pieces;
and one that falls into any limb falls in two ways:
either it falls into a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members/organs.
When it falls then into any of these places/organs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appear:
then you must refrain from extracting this arrow, for death follows in many forms/cases;
and when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls there and pierces the bone, and the dura mater, which is over the brain, bursts out, is when there is dizziness and stupor and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; 
and perhaps blood comes out of the nostrils, or the ears;
and perhaps he loses speech and voice;
and from the wound comes a white moisture resembling pus, and also something like burnt flesh comes out;
and if these signs appear to you, abstain from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow; 
and sometimes the arrow moves like the pulse, and black blood flows, and coldness comes with a cold sweat, and fainting:
know then without a doubt that death is coming.
And the sign of an arrow that injures the lung is that blood mixed with froth comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the chest, it is near the small ribs;
and causes great difficulty breathing, great pain and sighing;
and all the limbs from the shoulders down twitch/tremble.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will come out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some excrement comes out of the wound through a ruptured intestine, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out of the wound, and the patient feels severe pain:
know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, armpits, spine, ribs, thighs, legs, and similar parts, are safe according to various factors.
When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the tear duct at the root of the nose:
I probed it, and drew it out on the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without harm.
And I pulled out, as a game, an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye, below the lower eyelid, and the arrow was lodged, and I could only reach the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was a large one from a Turkish bow, with a light, smooth iron head without barbs;
the eye was healed, and no ill effects occurred.
And I pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabian arrow with barbs:
I filed down the barbs, and worked carefully until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I removed an arrow from a man, that had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change;
I cut down upon the arrow, and manipulated it, and pulled it out, and there were no ill effects.
And I also saw a man who had an arrow fall into his back, and the wound closed over it;
and the arrow remained inside him, and he did not change his natural habits, nor did he find harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw another man, who had an arrow fall into his face, and the wound closed;
and it remained thus without causing him great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And I extracted an arrow from one of the king's princes, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and was slightly inclined to the right side;
and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called to treat it three days after it had fallen.
I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for it with a very fine probe, and did not feel it;
and he felt a prick and pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the arrowhead. I applied an attractive and digestive plaster to the area, so that the place would not swell;
and the location of the arrow appeared to me.
I put the plaster there for several days, and the wound healed over again, and the patient remained like this for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; 
and he told me.
I applied a sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for several days, until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow, which was stuck in place;
then I added more of that sharp medicine into the opening of the wound, until the head of the arrow became clearly visible to me;
and the time period certainly exceeded four months, and then the wound widened enough so that I inserted the forceps, and moved it back and forth, but it could not come out;
then I did not cease to refine and devise different kinds of instruments, until one day I grasped it with well-made forceps, according to the form that will appear at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out, and healed the wound.
And physicians believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
then I restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you about the nature of extracting some arrows, so you should apply your care to that which I have not mentioned, because the book cannot include everything;
but the wise master understands much from little, and based on what is present and lacking, finds new work, and new instruments, for the removal of strange things that occur in this art. 
I say that arrows do not emerge from the limbs where they are embedded except in two ways:
either through the place where they entered, or through another part;
and the one that comes out through where it entered is an arrow entering fleshy places, and sometimes comes out immediately.
And if it does not come out immediately, leave it until the flesh around it rots, and the exit is widened; 
and also if it is embedded in the bone, and it cannot come out, leave it like that for some days, and move it every day;
and then it will come out, and if it does not, then pierce around it entirely with a thin drill, until the place around it is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head, and goes down to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the symptoms that I have mentioned appear in the patient:
do not pull it out, but leave it until it becomes even after some days, because if the arrow reaches the dura mater, it is death.
And if the arrow is only embedded in the bone, and does not reach the dura mater, and the patient remains for some days without ill effects, then devise a way to pull it out.
And if it is embedded very deeply like that and cannot come out easily, then apply drills around it, as I have told you;
then treat the area until it is healed.
And if the arrow is lodged in a place on the body where it cannot be seen, then search for it with the probe;
and if you feel it, then pull it out with a suitable instrument; 
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then enlarge the wound until it is large enough;
and pull the arrow out if you can, and if the arrow has barbs which are holding it in, then remove the flesh which is pierced on both sides as best you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow, so that you can pull it out;
and take care not to break the arrow, as you would have more difficulty removing it.
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the place around it is putrid, then pull it out, because the extraction will be easier. 
And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting a nerve or a vein, and strive how you can best remove the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and position the patient in the same way he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs indicate.
An arrow that comes out from another part, where any part of it is visible, or the skin is swollen around it so that it can be clearly seen or felt: 
then cut into it, until the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it:
if it jumps out immediately.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand circularly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it again, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it out with the entire shaft;
and if the shaft falls, and you want to administer pushing, then apply a threaded instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters the threading of the instrument;
and then push it out, and if the arrow is barbed, push in a pointed instrument, to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow falls into the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close, and you can cut down to it, then cut;
and be careful not to cut the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary;
and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which one draws out arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
And there are many kinds:
large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the pushing instrument is like the feather of a bird, to push against the tip of the arrow, as is the shape here:
The shape of the forceps for pushing and for pulling is here:
