of the uvula
When a cold descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round underneath, it is called "uvula.
When it is treated as we have said in the section, and the treatment is not effective, and you see that the hot abscess has subsided, and it is thin, then you must cut it; and the one that is round and compact and not long; and it is blood-red or dark-colored or black, then you must avoid cutting it.
For there is great danger to the patient.
It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, its paleness and its length, that you have the patient sit facing the sun, and depress the tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the hook into the uvula, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the tonsils.
And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the tonsils, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you must use ingenuity to cauterize it without fear.
And the manner of the cautery is with sharp water. (Or: And the type of cautery is sharp water.)
And the patient should put their head in your lap, and then you depress the tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and smear it with hot quicklime, ensuring that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and apply the tip of this instrument, which has the following shape: 
And it should have a small bowl at the tip where one puts the medicine, like the bowl of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula; and the patient should be lying on their side, so that the saliva and mucus runs from their mouth along with the medicine inside, so that it does not go down the throat and injure it; then hold your hand with the medicine and press it onto the uvula, for about half an hour, until you see it numbed and the burning of the medicine has subsided; and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with the cotton in the mouth, so that the cotton burns onto the uvula; and do this frequently, until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and it will fall off after four or five days. And if you need to repeat the cauterization with the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cauterization wipe around the uvula with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and it should be rinsed with cold water, and treated with gargles until it is healed. 
This treatment is safer than incision, even safer than cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in the following manner: take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, southernwood, and similar herbs, and combine them all, or some of them, in a pot, and add vinegar, and boil it; and the pot should be well-sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be a hollow instrument shaped like this:
And it should be made of silver or brass, and one end should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula through the mouth, until the uvula is cauterized; then repeat it often, until the uvula dries up. And be careful not to do this at the beginning of the development of a hot abscess, because several complications can occur; and do not apply this fire until the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, then take a cane and place an eggshell inside the end, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; because the eggshell prevents the vapor from irritating the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.
