O you, my very dear sons, I have completed for you this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and have made the end through its expositions and its declarations. 
And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is altogether restricted, so the science is lost and diminished, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have copied.
And from this has come error and vanity, and understanding is obscured, and knowledge is distanced.
Now it seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation;
and I will include along with it the forms of cautery irons, and other instruments of the work with the addition of the explanation and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is diminished.
And whoever undertakes it must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so much that he knows the arrangement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and arms and their number, and the course of the moving and resting veins, and the location of their origin. 
And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; 
and especially in the art of the hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, let him beware that he does not fall into error and kill people;
thus I have often seen several of those who undertake this science and so abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula in the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck;
whereby so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who removed a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large;
he also removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man was dead within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if he were cut, he would die from it.
And I saw another physician who took into his care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and along with the break there was a wound; 
and the physician, full of ignorance, tightened the break over the wound with splints, binding it very tightly, and did not leave any opening for the wound to drain, and left him like that for a period of time;
and ordered him not to untie it at all;
and it remained like that until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was ruined.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and untie the leg;
and when I had untied it, it was at peace and he felt no pain.
But nevertheless the infection was already established in the limb, and I could not heal it;
and the infection did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was completely lost.
And I saw another physician who lanced a festering abscess, and then it inflamed due to the poor state of the patient's health. 
For a canker, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be removed.
And therefore, dearest son, you need to know that manual work is divided into two parts:
namely, work where there is danger in several ways;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you protect yourself, so that foolish onlookers cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your tools wisely, and treat your patients gently and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you will succeed and be praised;
and leave the frightening diseases of severe nature;
and remove yourself from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can go from this world to the next in glory.
Galen says in some of his admonishments:
Do not undertake to treat a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish physician.
 I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and sharp medicinal cauteries, and the chapter is organized from the head to the feet;
and about the shapes of the instruments, and the cautery irons, and everything that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping glasses, and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is organized with the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
and it is organized from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
