O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science volume, and have made it whole through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And to me has come in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands - namely, "Surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is taught in our region and practiced entirely, it has been overshadowed by science and knowledge, with only minor details remaining from ancient texts that describe actions performed on limbs.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus comes about the error and folly, closing off understanding and separating knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I shall revive this treatise by following the order of exposure and explanation, as well as abbreviation; and I will also discuss the forms of cauldrons used for cautery, along with other instruments and materials in their preparation, where necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	to tc;s s ...
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Ipocras says that without bone is much, and with the sinew little; especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that those not understanding what has been said before may err and harm others; thus, I have often witnessed many who engage in this knowledge yet abandon experience and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who opened an abscess or gland of a woman's neck and cut the arteries thereof; hence so much blood issued that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And see a certain physician who treated an ill man's wound, and the wound was large; he took with it a portion of the bladder, and within three days, the man died inside.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the severity of the wound, and if it were not for treating it, he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another physician who took care of a duke from our land, whose leg was broken and with the fracture there was a wound; and the ignorant physician strained the fracture over the wound using strong bandages, not allowing any blood to flow through them, leaving it like this for so long that the leg became fully healed and the foot came to ruin. And the physician commanded him never to loosen it; thus it remained until his leg was completely healed but his foot suffered greatly.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and hurriedly unbind the leg; and when it was seen dislocated, there was peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in any case the rot had already settled into the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there was another physician who collapsed an abscess and it became infected, then inflamed due to the spite of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	and: the first.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	In this work, you must know that the art of hands is divided into two divisions: one involving danger in various forms; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in contemplation, and begin treating the sickly gently yet firmly, using the best course through God's grace so that you may be saved and honored; and let go of diseases causing serious health concerns with hope, and remove any doubts to fully believe in this such that you can come from this world into another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take ill health for a bad cause, lest you be called mad master."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treaty according to these three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal fever cauterizations, and it's structured from the head down to the feet; and on the forms of plasters, and tools for cautery, and all that is necessary in practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	byt a she. And:
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head up to the fingers, and the forms of strains.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So we remember this work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of aid and harm from each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is spoken in longer words and subtle science and hidden responses; and on this, many wise men speak, they agree with it; but their words are few to me because I recall the essence.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery assists universally in any constitution where there is matter; for two kinds of constitutions: namely hot sensitive to material and dry sensitive to material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a constitution that is both hot and dry, some suggest there are no matters and say fire cautery greatly helps; while others claim the opposite: that fire cautery only benefits diseases originating from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with heat for disease by heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that fire cautery greatly helps diseases that are hot and dry, which occur in human bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the person and their moisture to its constitution with heat, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree upon this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	ouest douce la cuire the luist les plaies. Et quant tu ne soigné, et les tires in its froid gues-le chaude of heat it est curet is à chaud déguises de a le croix coupeur temps let: Car tu; and l’ai ou la partis d’est douce or li cuise au teste.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every case, only let those involved be those who have experience and know the cautery treatise well, understanding long-standing usage of diverse patient constitutions, their dispositions and causes of diseases, occurrences, and duration over time; we do not fear other constitutions especially when it comes to cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my children, that fire-cautery is a secret of healing and more generous than caustic medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	The fire is simple, and does not come from force except to the limb that is cooked, and harms no other limb unless it has a name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Hot medicines come from one limb to another by alignment, and bring severe healing diseases to the limb; and sometimes it kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	; bud t
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they are agreed upon when to be made the fire cauteries, and choosing prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that fire cautery is appropriate in all times, because the damage occurring can be alleviated by its aid; and especially when the fire cautery is for urgent and severe pains that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you should never think about it, dear son, as the foolish knights do; for the disease that has been healed by cautery does not have a return; and they say so in this way; but it is not quite as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that alters the constitution, nor dry up the humors causing pain, rather they work faster than other medicines due to the potency of their effect.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the thing that can cause disease in any case according to the constitution of the patient and the nature of the ailment and its power is an accumulation assembled within them from the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered at the right time where there's little excess moisture, as with dense caustics for pain, and those like it; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicines; and it is true; but they wrongly believe that caustics have no value after medicine, when in fact, caustics are the last of medicines because we administer them as remedies for any illness which alone have worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then indeed, fire cautery is the last of medicines, not according to the misguided beliefs of fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a surgical instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they claimed this was due to the quality of gold and the value of its substance; however, they argued that the heat from cautery does not cause putrefaction, but it indeed causes damage, as I have tested it and found that it does cause harm in some men. Therefore, gold surgical tools are less effective than iron ones, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Nevertheless, whenever you heat an instrument made of gold, it does not retain its heat due to the color of gold and cools down quickly; and if overheated, they lose their effectiveness, as demonstrated by fire. Thus, there is quite enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we employ fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And I have ordered this chapter from the main points up until now so that the journey may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil is often used in medieval medical treatments for its supposed healing properties, though it should be noted that many of these beliefs were not based on our modern understanding of medicine and science. It was sometimes applied externally as a salve or ointment to wounds or afflictions such as skin conditions, believed to have soothing effects due to the oil's moisturizing properties.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These fire cauteries are effective for moisture and cold on the brain, and among them there is a sweet way to treat an illness called 'soda,' as well as due to various humors descending into the ears, and causing numerous dreams and toothache pain, throat pain, and primarily for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this fire cautery is that the patient be purged by a solvent medicine which changes their state .iii or .iiij., according to what their virtue, temperament, and habitation can withstand; then raise up the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then you make the patient sit between your hands, and place your hands over their knees; afterwards put the root of your palm onto the root of his neck between his two eyes; and there will come both ways of your fingers, so that it bleeds firstly and then cool down with a cautery called 'olivare', which is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	The physician applies ink to the joint, and draws and strains your hand little by little while turning it; then gently lift your hand, and adjust the joint as you see a small bone; if you do not see it, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. After taking a bit of wax, place soft cotton within, put on the joint, and leave for three days; then apply fine cloth soaked in butter; let heal until the inflammation is gone; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacist", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if said by the elders that when an open wound persists longer, more cleansing occurs; therefore apply remedies.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should not overuse the cautery if part of the bone is burnt; and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that one must cauterize for as long as necessary, and press so hard that the bone is widened just like the straps women wear in their shoes to allow fluids to flow out; and the wound should be left open for a prolonged period before closing it; afterwards, it must be cleaned and dressed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me good in all cases except for some men who have a cause for fear; I think it seems better to leave them alone, as the head weakens from continuous natural solutions, just as we testify with other limbs; similarly when the head is naturally feeble and the first sign of cauterization appears more healing and beneficial to me, so my work on this matter results in a combined benefit.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Regarding the pain from an open wound
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain arises throughout the head and lasts long, one must employ herbs and pills called "cochie," as well as enemas of chief and oils and plasters; and if the cautery that we have previously mentioned is performed on them, it helps.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be aware that the patient's head is in a severe condition and not too cold; then one should perform the cautery underneath from the cautery as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and do a "vasselz" cautery in place; and these are spots where one applies cups. Lift your hand so that you cannot see all the way to the bone: the patient feels much more pain from this cautery than others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those used in the middle of the head, which is as follows:
dou cautere dou chief	For both fire cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in any part of the head, and the disease extends up to the ear, and the head is purged by medicinal substances, along with all other treatments previously mentioned for diseases, none of which help: then you shall perform fire cauterization as per two methods - one with ague medicine and the other with pitch.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with ague medicine involves grabbing a piece of alum the size of two nails, removing its peel and covering it with two small chips of ivory; then place it on the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can reinsert the piece of alum under the skin; when it is properly inserted, ensure that it remains tightly secured for 12 hours; after this period, remove it and apply fat to the wound, leaving the site like this for two or three days; then cover with a linen soaked in butter until pus forms.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see any of the written incendiary medicines, treat them as I have described or divided among incendiary medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron caustery according to this manner is made thus: heat the iron piece which has the shape of a goose's neck.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell with .i. spot of corrobin, and about one small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently rotate the iron slightly, until half of the sponge-like substance inside has turned black; then release your hand as blood flows abundantly out from behind.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then apply freshly boiled cotton soaked in butter, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the cautery called "cultellus" at its tip, but be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that isn't ancient.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you are treating a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not respond to either medication or iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellus" until it is white; and so place your hand on the painful wound for half an hour long, and after removing your hand once, pull out enough that you do not cut the artery and reach only to the bone. Watch out for the jaw that moves when biting, and ensure that the nerves have no reaction and that spasms do not occur in the patient, and watch out for bleeding from the artery after it is cauterized, or if caustication causes great fear and anxiety to those who are unaware and unaccustomed. Leave the vein halfway; but I will tell you how blood can be stopped once the artery is cauterized, and I will show you where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this caustic does not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, apply it within the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy; if you see, provide the caustic which our chapter of artery extraction has described, with the caustic that has two blades; this caustic is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from coldness, and one has used soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not subside, then warm this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the ear of the patient, where both sides feel pain, move away slightly from the root of the ear once you have located it; and use six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
de la torture de la bouche	For the treatment of mouth wounds.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform a fire treatment for similar cases resulting from pus and black matter of veins.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torment that causes swelling from insect bites and chief purifications and gargling, then there is no value in it. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third where the two lips meet; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, making an incision near the top of the outer ear, and another along the length similar to a thumb's breadth. Leave the cautery until half the skin is charred; this is the method for the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is this type of incision we have mentioned before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires the knife to be somewhat larger; after performing as I have explained previously, until it heals soundly.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When treating an apoplexy that is long-standing and you treat it as we have said before, and if there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then make three cauteries: two on each of the two points of the top of the head, and one in the middle, and one where they are called "vessels" as we have said before, and the following one above the mouth of the stomabg. Treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pills that clear the brain; afterwards, cut off their head entirely, and place on the occiput the flaxseed oil prescribed for plasters; this is how cauterization is done: do as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus done well, it is good; and if not, then do as follows: make three cauterizations below the head by descending to the collarbone, each with two fingers' width of space between them; treat them as the others are treated, and if you see any congestion, also perform one in the center; and if necessary, do two more above the two points I mentioned before, and cure until they are clear; and use the type of cauterization called "olivary," as I have previously described.
de la froidor dou chief	From coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to warm the head with wool as we have previously mentioned; after placing the head of the patient on their hands, then make a fire cupping over each horn and .i. behind and .iij. above the spine of the neck; and if you deem it necessary, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease has advanced far, make .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; leave them until the most inflamed part heals, remove your hand; after curing as long as it becomes healthy, and let be the cautery that we have previously called "olivare".
de l’epilempsie	On epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cool the brain with ice and other treatments we have mentioned in the division when the patient is greatly suffering and enduring hardships of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, they do gargarism and chewing to cool the brain often with bone meats; afterwards, the head is milled in oil, as we have said before, and one fire cautery on the throat, and on each horn; and if the patient is greatly suffering and afflicted, they undergo fire cauterization as I have mentioned to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, in the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child with these symptoms, they undergo a subtle fire cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moistures and heavy phlegm, then one should perform the kind of caustic cautery as we have told for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy there are declining excesses towards melancholy, and the body is ill-humored and moist, then give it something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what it is before in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the ill person is done; after making .i. tortex made of flax well-formed, like .i. circle, place it inside the head; and the patient's legs are crossed, and held well from all sides; then apply the liniment, and move with ancient buffalo butter; and warm with fire quickly, so that they can endure to pour in hot oil; after emptying the circle into within the head, let it cool down; and do this to the sick person once a week with another good government until he is sane.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	When you observe the caustic during its making, apply it to all parts of the caustic. This method cools the brain evenly; then place cotton wool soaked in butter and lamb fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	From underneath the eyes.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the pain first comes as described in the divisions, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protects from all dampness, making them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomamen't venu plusors par l’ivreement des eulz
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to raise his head, and make a fire cautery in the head, and two cauterizations above the temples where the root of pain is at both eyes together, or in one if it's only in that eye; wrap all the blood vessels and arteries under the forehead, making the cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding too much, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop using hot irons as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making an incision how to cauterize them; never make a fire or hot iron under either of the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	In the body's tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and upon the veins, or near the arteries that appear in front of the forehead; and one sees that it is from cold, watery excesses, then perform the cauterization as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: i. cauterization on the head, ii. cauterizations above the two temples, and ii. cauterizations or thread-like below the two bones; and if more is needed, cauterize skillfully with a small cauterization at each eyebrow.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	To cause tears to flow within the eyes themselves.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three pints of a certain wine cocktail; afterward on his head, and perform either cauterization or miliau with olive oil caustic; and two "clavilist" cauterizations above the eyebrows, slightly below the hairline; and beware not to harm the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the fire cautery, which is called "clavalis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the parchment of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then use the cautioning from this fire cautery called "olivare." This is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries over the eyes of the sorcerer as long as their eyelids are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the parchment is burnt, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	; that t n's armoust et s. If youd: line Tarn:
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At no time do the eyelash hairs turn into scales, and they irritate the eye, so it is treated with caustery according to two methods: that of fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in health; after marking on the eyelids a figure that is similar to the feather of myrtle, and begin with the sign near the hairs; then place cotton cloth soaked in egg white and musk oil over the eye, then apply this form of cautery:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the wound you have made with a hot iron repeatedly and many times, let the skin be red at that spot; and the signs of healing are when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the size of an egg; then gently wash your hands and leave it so for three days, then apply moistened cotton in oil until the scald is gone; afterward treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come in, and the paper is softened as before; then continue the cautery at that same place; and if the hair does not grow, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place and is even, without touching the skin with the iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot iron cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow tall and even, then make a leaf of paper from parchment; then take French soap and lively salt, each one ounce of both, and grind them together well; and quickly do it without letting it cool, then press on the form as if making leaves of myrtle, and put over the paper with the iron; and if the disease is only in a bone, work it in one piece, and so too; and apply woolen cotton dipped in oil; and let the patient's head be in your hands and press gently on the medicine, and squeeze him slightly every time that the patient feels the pricking of the medicine as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done so for some time, apply the appropriate medication to your wound.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling is gone and you have elevated the affected area, if you see the vein raised just as it would be from heat or incision, then it is well. If not, reapply medication to the wound until your efforts are balanced, and the eyes are aligned; then apply a cotton pad soaked in oil until the scab forms, followed by dressing the wound with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And take great care in your treatment so that the medicine does not wash away from the eyes. If the vein becomes thin again and the hairs poke at the ointment, resume medicating the affected area as you did before; after which heal until it is healthy again; this is the form of a sparrow's nest:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so should be your constraints; and do not return the straight path to those whose study is in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and if your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary for you to perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and guide the assistant's head between your hands so that it does not move or turn its head; afterwards place cotton wool moistened with vinegar or juice of pennyroyal on it: then heat the cautery which is tied; position it as close to the skull as a quill to a bowl, ensuring the needle is also attached to the cautery; if you see, ensure it is pointed from one side to the other like a tent, but regardless, this that is against the head serves for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating any pus, and drying it out; and if it is closed, proceed with your work, and press firmly around the edge; afterwards place the heated cautery correctly on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at a part of soft tissue over the bone, so that your hands do not cause injury; then insert the curtaret into the oil's grease, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the cauterization up to the bone, it would be good. If not, if necessary, then resume the cautery once more, and as needed, and leave it .iii. jars; afterwards apply cotton wool in fat, and healing ointment until dry until sane, and xl. days pass that it is dry, so put medicine corrosive until bone until clear; and the cure according to come up on as per the chapter of its chapter comes in this.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of fire cautery for anorectal abscesses that none of the ancients mentioned. Understand about the abscess, and take from it the pus; afterwards insert into the wound a subtle implement whose form is as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And make the quantity of about half a ounce; and hold your hand or implement firmly without moving so that the liquid does not flow out too quickly; it is necessary to place above the wound cotton swab in an ointment tube, either one ounce or two: this will treat the abscess properly and heal remarkably.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the abscess is healed by the fire cautery we have described, it's good. If not, one should administer a pessary to the woman, and bring the fistula back into its proper place in accordance with where it originally was.
des crevaices en levres	From cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there occur lip cracks called "hairs," particularly in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small pointed cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	which is not the f they are noce
de l’aposteme de la goule	From the incision of a boil on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When a boil appears at the root of the throat or in the ear, palate, or tooth roots, after having decayed and rotten and become old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have described in divisions, and it does not heal: then it is necessary for you to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the funtule; after the boring or piercing of the fistule, hold your hand until the hot iron comes into contact with its source, and thereafter at rest; perform thus once or twice, after the treatment as we have described in treatments, until it is healthy; if treated this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the cause and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	The two movements of the teeth (or "dou mouvement des dens") likely refers to dental issues such as shifting or misalignment within Old French medical texts. It could also pertain to treatments involving teeth, like adjusting their position for proper occlusion or addressing dental abscesses that might require procedures akin to modern endodontics or extractions.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines that do not work, then place the head of the patient in his health; after cooling the cautery, its shape will come to be as follows where you place a coin on the tooth; insert into the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, resume the cautery at your discretion; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it sit for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner that the tooth which was moving is firmly put back; and the softened gums are kept from further movement, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold or heat, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization by two methods: cauterization with butter and cautereby fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is as follows: take butter from the cow, and a tip of an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of the spoon so that a ball of melted butter forms, and quickly apply it to the painful tooth until it has cooled; do this often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth. If you see wool and cotton in butter when heated, then quickly apply it to the painful tooth again and heat with an iron until the heat reaches the joint of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cauterization with fire is as follows: take an iron or copper tube that is thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient'anno mouth; after heating the caustic, its form will come afterwards and apply it to the painful tooth, holding your hand until it has cooled; do this often, as the pain will be relieved on that day or the following. It is necessary for the sickly person to fill his mouth with good butter during the cauterization process and then spit it out; and that's what happens because of the caustic:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform a cautery on whichever nail you wish, according to what you are able; and this is the shape of the cataract.
des scrophules	And of the scrofulous swellings.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulous swellings are caused by cold humors and moistures, not responding to medicines, then apply the hot caustic herb as follows: make two openings for smoke to escape from the other side; place the caustic upon the abscess once or twice if necessary until it reaches the edge of the abscess. If the abscess is small, apply the caustic according to its size and leave it thus for three days; then cover with cotton soaked in butter as long as the abrasion remains open. Afterward, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moistures prevail in the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first purge the patient with soluble medicines; afterward do a cautery at the root of the throat but not up to the throat itself and only burn slightly. Then do another cautery on the joint at the neck's spine base, where is the clavile called 'clavicle'; and heal it as we have stated before until it is sound again.
de la toust	To treat inflammation of the throat, also known as tonsillitis or pharyngitis.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the throat are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor chills, and it is an early illness, then do two cauteries on both sides below the Adam's apple; and another cautery in between the nipples. And there should be a cautery called 'clavicle', as per the form which was previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see this, perform cautery by continuously pressing all the points called "points" as previously mentioned in ear diseases; and let them be up to xxx points or within that range. After treating the area as described above, have the cauteries at iij (3) rains according to this method:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And thus they are lighter cauteries because you make them of iii parts each.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding shoulder joint dislocation.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After examining the patient on their back and side ribs; then remove the core within the gallbladder from your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, apply the cauterizing tool with two hot needles as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the core until it reaches the ribs, and the figure of cauterization is four cauters; and because this cauterizing tool has three hot needles, hence the figures of cauterization are three cauters each; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, which is the form of the cauterizing tool with three hot needangs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	On any occasion it is touched upon this particular nerve, where there are seven cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery for the grains to be scraped off with a blade; afterwards allow the patient to rest, and do not move the limb for an extended time until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it becomes dislocated again, very little happens as a result; then perform the cautery on the thickness of the clavicle blade or many pinches of cauterization. Because the joint is refractured, and bone moisture remains and the patient recovers healthily.
dou cautere de pleuresin	byrto:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said one should make pleurisy cauteries from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, dry it completely, and make it just as thick and long as your finger; then grind it with oil, hold it over fire, and perform one large cauterization between the philtrum and collarbone, and two small cauterizations slightly down in the area below the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth, angling backward slightly; and one cauterization at the hip, another above the stomwart, and one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the lower ribs; and do not press too hard with your hand, but make it open as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancient ones said that no man should use a fire-cautery resembling shaving, and heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then there is relief from pain as we have described in the liver abscess. But in this kind of treatment, fear or illness often cause death immediately, or a fistula appears that cannot be healed.
de la mice	The ancient ones said that no man should use a cautery resembling shaving, heat it and place it between the ribs until an abscess reaches; then there is relief from pain as we have described in liver abscess. But in this kind of treatment often fear or illness cause death immediately, or fistula appears that cannot be healed.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the illness of epilepsy as we have said in the previous sections on treatments, and it proves effective, then there are three methods of cautery that all work well.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One method is to make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the seizure, following the shape of the liver cautery we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all at once, let the patient lie on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Another method of cautery is to use the one with two nerves as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and elevate the part where the illness comes from toward the left side, and do lifts according to the size of the body, with the cautery being proportionate to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, and then apply the fire cautery, and in this way there will be four (of them). And if you see it, cauterize all of the area with the cautery at three more points. After curing when it has taken feculence for a long time, and this is equivalent to moving one of the previously mentioned treatments.
de ydropisie	Dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, but rather in the manner called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions and your treatment does not work, then you must make four cauteries around the waist, one over the stomwartz, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one on another place the genitals; and let each cautery be close to the area of the body where the swelling is.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open to promote long-lasting healing, and do not release the care for the patient after cauterization; recovery would be quickened, and both intentions are together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a spindle as we have shown before; and that for the back should be oval, as it is placed here ahead.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of inflammation in the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the fingers are swollen in one who is jaundiced, and are full of yellow bile, it should be that you cauterize on the back between the little finger and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery turning. And do not go too deep in, thus you would squeeebore the yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on two legs two cauldrons in each leg at the point of the shin bone; and let the cauldron be elongated, one below the knee forward and the other backward along the leg; leave the caudrons long enough to allow the bile to flow out. Then cure the other boils as we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of melancholy
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines flow out, they cannot be treated by common methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was mentioned before about the stomach's cautery, or stomach cauterization; and four subtle cauteries around the belly circulate; and one main cautery is subdivided into eight subtle, pointed cauteries, and two on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the palm, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When bunions are at the foundation, or one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if you make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, those that are just before lumbar vertebrae a little and gradually towards each side, and I cautery under the buttocks; two.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think its stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face do a great cautery as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another under the ribs at all cauteries; let the cautery remain open for long periods. Afterward cleanse the wound until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the flesh which is called "thelel".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat an ulcer, heat the cautery which looks like a small razor, and then set it all ablaze on that ulcer; leave your hand and the cautery where blood vessels are born, from which bleeding occurs; do this once or twice, and if there is much of the ulcer, cauterize each as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they heal; and if you use a large cautery on an abscess, it will provide greater help.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, we will tell you in its place about a disease that cannot be healed but by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula occurs and is infected, aged, and filled with rotting flesh and corrupted moisture, you must completely cover it with a fine veil, ensuring that you know its entire extent. After heating the cautery, which appears like a small razor, apply it to the fistula according to the amount of material entered therein, then resume the cauterization until once or twice or thrice as needed based on the quantity required; be careful not to burn the nerve that lies within. If the fistula reaches the bladder or intestine, avoid these areas and do not pass it through anything other than a natural opening, thinking it is not an enemy; afterward, treat the cavity until it is healthy, and if the materials are removed over a long period, then you know the cavity is entirely healed; and if the materials have not been removed, understand that the cavity is still inflamed and the bone at its core is corrupted; thus, as one of those we mention in this location.
de la maladie des reins	On kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	As the robinde ceste les mille ontes de maladies auge tout l’esle cure les raines talies les ardreles sus tousmement la eau vient li ne parlet les rnages, et nos, desquels nus.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is heavy and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery on the part behind the bladaderivereceur de l’enfant qui vient au monde en desordre, et tu le remets par grant movement.
de la marris	of the testicles
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, they do not produce semen, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation; when they come, there is great pain: then one must make three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary bladder cautery, and two on the back; and the third should be a cruciate cautery.
de la hainche	Causes of thigh pain:
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When moisture-filled vesicles drain to the bladder of the thigh and as a result it moves out of its place, with signs that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lymph nodes are found in the groin area, then you must cauterize the patient above the bladder of the thigh at one circular cautery, and position so that it surrounds the bladder as it turns, ensuring the bladder is within the circle; and use cauteries similar to those used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive-oil cauterizations and let the cauterization be as large as all the keys; treat until it is sound.
de la dolor de la hainche	From the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in the division and treatment does not help, and the disease is old: then you must purge the ill person of large humors with foul pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After performing the caustic treatment; and the manner of applying this caustic is in two ways: namely, with burning medicines and fire cautery. Fire cautery has many methods, among which one is as follows: you must triangularly make three cauterizations on the bolt of the elbow, each well-made and deep, spacing them apart by the width of a thumb, making them olive shaped; nevertheless, at times in the middle of the elbow's head, there are four according to this method:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see the triangular caustic we have mentioned earlier for elbow dislocations; but apply it so that the circle contains the entire elbow and all its surrounding skin is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way to treat sciatica when pain is felt in the elbow and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, you shall make two caustics where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cauterization under the ankle four fingers' width; and let it be olive shaped, and dry out the fleshy part of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to the toe or near it, you shall cauterize where he senses the pain three times or four with a cauterization called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If necessary, if more is to be done; and if it seems that the pain is moving from below the groin towards the thigh, make a cautery with the caustic or circular caustic, and give good care in all your cauteries so you do not cause harm to either the caustic itself or burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not further harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who did cauterization on the ankle joint of the foot, and they continued until the entire leg was consumed, and so were the bones, which became perforated and corrupted throughout. After a stomach solution, it caused their death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two adjacent parts together, make a cautery on both according to this manner. // The wise say in the cauterization of the haunch, here is the method, make one such iron and it should be as large as a small dagger or slightly less, and have gaps between them so that from one gap to another there is space equal to a nut's size; and the gaps are over two parts equally, and they also resemble nails. And it has an iron rod well made: here is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure it is heated until all are red and blistered, then place it on the malady's haunch bag, and twist onto its side; cauterize with one iron cautery three times and leave it for three days; afterwards apply honey ointment and let the open wound remain exposed for a long time; afterward, treat with salve until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few people do so; yet it is a good cautery that can be endured, wherever it may touch.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar matters of cold substance spreading, none of these cases call for fire cauterization; rather it is for those who have an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other substances, apply three lines of fire cauterization at the spot where pain is felt; in each line make five caustic burns or more depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure. The caustic burns should be made according to the "point" method; if you see it necessary, apply three or four caustic burns at the midline using this technique:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs at the onset are that they have a narrow back when sitting up, and fear. You will find it in the lowest spine of the back and above the appearance that comes among other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and observe it healing, then cauterize with a caustic cautery according to the following method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the caustic cautery is needed on any part of the spine, evenly distribute it across. And if you see, then apply a pricking cautery two or three lines close to each other around the area as we have said before, and heal the wound until it is clean, being careful not to place the caustic cautery on any area where nerves may be in danger.
de la dolor des jointes	For pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is from moistures that spread to every part of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and cannot be healed by medicines, then they are treated with cauldrons thus: make a circle of cauldrons around the joint of the foot, and let the cauldrons be olive oil according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is a need to grasp the face of the foot, make cauldrons all around each named "point". And when pains come near to joints and other joints, which often happens, then you make cauldrums on each joint 3 or 4 for every part; with olive oil over each. And if more is needed, do so, but not keep your hand close unless the color of heat arises.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pain descends to joints and the back, treat with cauldrons as we have mentioned in this chapter. And if the pain is of hands, make points around the palm 2 lines; and if there remains no pain on the thumbs, then treat each joint and hair of hand; and if pains come to ears or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the sickly and administer medicine. For if you do good governance and you purge phlegm, you will be helped by God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the routine for this fracture
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the fracture is near, and the bones descend towards the knees, forming anew, when you see it to be healed, let not more than one day pass; and use remedies that relieve the stomach so the spleen descends from the belly. After this, make him sit on his back between your hands, commanding him to stretch his arm until the bones are mended, and move it with your fingers at both elbows, and bind above the fracture to the bone of the wrist; and as a sign, let it resemble three-quarters of a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Until it is white and drips clear. Then move the bones to their place; and instruct the patient not to let his hands turn backward; and work well on the legs of the sick man, placing a cushion and a sling around the thighs, and another under the feet that he grips with his hands; then place the caustic at the sign using your whole hand, straight and until you reach the bone, and if not reached in the first attempt, try again as many times as needed to reach up to the b
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your actions are worthless. It is necessary for children's cauldrons to be subtle according to their size, and large people'angs also large according to their measure; after three days heal it in place with butter until the burn is scabbed over; then treat it with other ointments until it is sound, and rest the patient for 40 days on his back until the wound is well closed; and it must be that his strengthenings are lengthy so that the swelling does not come out when he wants to get up into bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, let him be fitted with a well-made bandage, and wear it for 40 more days; have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive drinking and eating, and shouting too loudly; and when this teaching is complete, he will be fully sound. And I will now say after the treatment of shearing in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the routine care of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When growths come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one full cautery with the heated iron according to its quantity; let it be two-thirds at the level of the wound; afterward treat as we have said; and none of the old ones have said that it should be cauldrered by the hot iron at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the level of the wound and make a line for the width above the growth; another behind it, and hold your hand over all of the cauldration carefully. However, the first cauldrations are lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain lasts a long time, with medicinal treatment proving ineffective, then one must be cauterized with a caustic called "points," and the caustics should be applied according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and pain. If it is suitable for the first caustic, that's good; if not, begin another caustic above it, as custom dictates that one must move within the limb nearest to the pain, so it is necessary to make the caustics until the patient becomes well.
de meselerie	Of healing art
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The healing arts have been aided at times by caustic treatment greatly, especially the diseases that arise from putrefaction of vapours and melancholy. If you can see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning, and if it has been treated as we have said in the division, and neither rises nor falls back; and if you doubt whether the corruption does not affect all of the sickness, then apply .5 causters on the head: one above the forehead near the nose at the end of the hairs; two on each side of the horns, and one behind the ear; let your hand remain that the cauterizes to the bone, and as long as the scales come out so that the vapors of gross humours can escape.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the pus is everywhere visible and manifest; then it must be treated with the cauteries we have mentioned earlier, such as one on each side of the collarbone, two along the spine at the neck, five along the spine at the back, a large one near the groin and another nearby, two on either shoulder blade, two above the hips, two over the tendons of the thighs, one over each joint in the hands and feet, and one for the palm pits; beware not to burn any veins that are close behind it. Never do cauterization on the bone of the wrist, nor once on the bone of the stomach, nor anywhere near the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Know that the more you do with cauterization, the more it helps and benefits him; know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would because their body is already thoroughly corrupted. It must be ensured that the size of the cautery varcuets according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find them in handling iron tools. After healing with lime flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is safe.
de enfleure	It should be ensured that the application of cautery varies in size according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find them in handling iron tools; after healing with lime flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is safe.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healthy, then make cautery on the limb according to its size and extent; the cautery should be slightly penetrating into the skin color of the area. Then treat with ointments until it is healthy. At times a cautery is made on the hand or foot or back, where the nerve causes movement in the limb, thus an inflammation occurs there; however, do not meddle if you are not familiar with the limbs and the pathways of the moving nerves.
de albaras	The practice known as 'albaras' involves applying a heated iron or substance to the skin, creating cauterization that closes wounds, removes growths, or stops bleeding by sealing blood vessels through heat coagulation.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaramo" is old and medical remedies prove ineffective, then cauterize with a small iron, according to the quantity of the substance required, until the blanching disappears and it changes color; then treat with flour of lentils and oil of roses and plantain leaves, as well as blood from a rabbit and blood of almonds, in equal parts each. Combine everything together, wrap it in cloth, and air it out until healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers through cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When ulcers begin to appear and you see them starting to form, cauterize the area with a circular cautery around the entire circumference of the ulcer. However, some physicians claim that caulterization should also be done within the depths of the ulcer; however, I do not believe this is good, as it may cause further ulceration and corruption, which has never happened to me before in any case; moreover, a more suitable approach would be cauterization around it using the 'circular' cautery as we have discussed among many types of caulteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	For non-healing swellings that cannot be healed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati", which is prone to death or due to the excess it causes, or from the poor condition of the patient when they are very old and have little blood, or in time; and you see them close to dying: then cauterize around with many small caustics by pinching; afterwards leave as is. For it will be inclined to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire area with caustics, heat the area where the shape is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand within the disease called "adubelati" until the caustics have penetrated to the core, and be such that the patient feels the heat behind them somewhat so that the course of putrefaction is alleviated. Afterwards, cure it until it is perfectly sound.
li cure dou feu par fer	The care of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of illness called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a swelling in the limb, for it consumes the limbs just as fire dries out tinder. If you see this disease present that could suffer from cauterization with iron, then according to where the location or the illness lies; firstly perform cauterizations both small and large over all parts until you have removed the entire corruption, leaving nothing of it behind so that everything that is corrupted has been excised. And let it be for three days, after which apply ointments with oil to the burned areas from iron as long as the burns heal and the corruption disappears. Afterward, proceed with the treatment of salves producing charm. And if you see that after three days there is no improvement, then this is good; but if not, continue cauterization where the corrupted tissue remains. This swelling has never been treated in situ with iron as a cure immediately followed by medical leeches, however, cauterization with iron is of greater help and I have already mentioned the treatment of medical leeches in another section: take whatever quantity you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Cords or strings that come to the fingers
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often it happens that in the fingers a disease arises which we call "closed", and is a large swelling causing pain to the foot. The treatment for this illness comes in two forms: fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating a tool like a blacksmith's tongs made of good iron that can encompvee all parts around the nail, with delicate margins; then place it very hot on the nail and turn your hand all around it until it reaches the source of heat; leave it so for three days until pus begins to form. Then make a poultice of freshly chopped radishes mixed with salt, and let the poultice remain overnight, after which the swelling will shrink and be drawn out from its roots. Afterward, treat the wound with anointing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	If they are converted forward in the body, and often occurs in hands and fingers, then you must perform hot water cautery; it is done thus: take a needle made of iron or steel, or a blacksmith's tongs, place it on the nail and its shaft (that is to say, for warts); put the needle so that it pierces all around, then add some hot water, hold your hand tightly, and press while turning until the edge of the neednose reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply to its roots; let the patient endure a bit of burning from the hot water for an hour. Then leave it as such, and all will be drawn out along with their roots. Do this again at another time, until you have removed all that is in the body; then treat them with healing ointments.
li cure dou trembler	of the pen, which to make s le tissaz:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from coldness of the limbs or fever quartan or other, it is necessary to make .iiij. (four) cauteries or .iv. (four) on the spine along the back; one cautery between each vertebrae; and one at the waist with an olive oil cauterization; this will cease the trembling, and restore their health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Never apparent on the body bathing or pus-filled pustules that come from large corrupted materials. If they first appear, one should perform a delicate cauterization on each head of the pustule: an incision made with wood stained to a point with fire, or long root of aristolochia, or lenticular incision. And whenever these are cauterized at their beginning when they first appear in this manner, they do not grow into more prominent lesions but are broken down; the excess matter from which they come is relieved and cleansed; however, it must be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is harmed
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there occur great consequences of arterial blood that is drawn to the wound from afar, or from an abscess incision, or on a limb cauterization, and similar things; it is very serious to stop the bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when it happens to anyone, hurry to put your index finger on the vein wound, and strain as much until the blood is calmed below your finger; then apply with fire small or large olive oil caustics until they are all reddened; then take .i., either great or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and put a cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps away when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the caustic is extinguished, then quickly take another from those heated near the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue doing them one after another until the blood has stopped; and guard that you do not burn the nerve near it, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is cut off from the blood flow, it cannot be properly tied up if the artery is large, unless by one of these four ways we have mentioned: by cauterization or extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong wrapping with thread, or by medicines applied that can stop bleeding; and it should be tied and strained at once.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will provide the tight binding with cloths or burning substances on it, or other similar things, if there is no good result.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this happens to anyone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then you must put your index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it well until it is tightly pressed against the wound and vein; do not move it, but moisten with cold water often so that it becomes very cold enough to freeze and thicken and adhere; then make incisions there where you need cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on wound suturing.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicine, and pains, causes, remedies, and forms of cauterization; I placed that chapter up to fingers, and I will go on this chapter by the same way so that it is easier to find what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this section, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cauterization, and therefore greater care is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening a vein, and incision over an abscess, and wound treatment, and arrow extraction, and stone cutting, among other things; where doubt and fear arise, leading to the deaths of many.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to engage in folly. For many people come seeking cures. Some arrive from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die easily due to the abandonment of their disease, and the severity of their suffering; about these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these are those who give you their attention, and say: "Wait, I am in charge"; and the patient is desperate. You should not only consent to those who come to you with this approach, but also show greater compassion for your honor than for your self-interest, and do not hastily act on what you are certain of and can take and lose; use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick so that health is converted, and this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and memory of kingdom.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as I discussed in the previous chapter about cautery, from head to feet, so that you may find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water, headache
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this disease often comes from children during childbirth, and when the birth canal is too tightly constricted around the baby's head; there has never been a case where it was resolved without knowing why.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, and it seems that everyone who has had it died quickly; for these reasons, I believe it is worth dedicating more effort to studying its treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	s the bonji sont by their lele'sgrde and let they en toce ouraccue eaulet on t’s ; the louloient; man les a bont; Or (cont ses que contura. ça l’sudre t persef; it couch, so s... in ancisd;e ben;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is excessive moisture, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross, following this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone and you see signs such as redness at the top of each part, and it bleeds profusely when pressed with your hand inside, and has not been reset properly: then make three incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all moisture with a cloth and powders; then apply wine and oil, leaving it as such until the fifth day; afterwards, uncover it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to heal evenly, and give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	In another manner of incision, observe if the head of the abscess is visible and the color of the water (pus); for it is never before, never behind, never to the right, nor ever to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Thus, cut where the head of the abscess is visible and the filling of pus, according to your ability; and be careful not to puncture an artery; ensure a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the normal flow of blood and evacuation of pus.
de reume	Of restoration
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and has been present for some time, and medical treatment proves ineffective, then the subsequent remedy is the fire cautery with which one ties off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you tie off the eyes, instruct the patient to lie back his head; afterwards, rub their face with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the collar bone with one entire cloth; then examine where the vein is, and both eyes are behind the ears, but only slightly protrude; then close the eyelids with thread loops, then tie off each with a strip of gut about two parts long until it reaches the bone, and ties wide at the top.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see this, take the gut strip off from above the artery and tie it upwards as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, let it bleed continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon touching, then measure three inches of space and bind it tight until reaching the bone; the amount of blood to let flow is five ounces (5oz), with a possibility of more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery. Then examine the wound: if there remains no sign of syphilis near it upon opening, and an abscess does not appear, then straighten the wound and stitches, and treat with ointment until it heals completely.
de emigrainne	And when infection until is gone: let it up to cease; sirop dressez it syphon, and sew on after aseepistressure; as it untie the wound to treat with the syring.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When migraine occurs early and with acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old headache, and medicine by methods of medical treatment does not help at all, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have demonstrated.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient rubs back the hair on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, as it beats well by its pulsation, and it's not refilled much like some men who are too cold; if it does refill, then the patient pulls out a piece of cloth from the area, then rubs the place with an abrasive cloth, and applies warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which this form is:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then bind it tightly with strips of cloth that are around each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the tip of a pin, then cover that area according to the quantity of the two shots. For if it's not covered, it won't heal properly at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the bleeding of the veins until it stops within three hours; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two loops from a strong double silk thread, so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and blood flows through it; then remove any excess between the two ligatures at the same moment, and then, if necessary, cauterize with the caustic spatula until reaching bone as long as the head remains closed; this is the completed work, provided the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For caustics are used to finish abscesses: that's why they are of greater help with abscesses.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	In the extraction of arrows, you should fill the cavity with thick cotton and well-made bandages; and when you remove them, then treat with dry medicines that generate heat, as well as compresses, until it is healed; and if the arrowhead remains deep within so much as you work upon it, be quick to sear by cauterization, or fill the cavity with vitriol and the pound on your hand to make the wound tighten; and if not present, then place ice on the wound until it is frozen, and irrigate the wound with cold water until the wound heals as it should. The completion of arrow extraction is that you cauterize the vein of .ij. parts, but the cutting be well sharpened so long longer maintains them;
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When inflammations are too prolonged, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a certain width, and then when you have reached both sides, heat an iron until it is glowing red to the bone, cut the vein in two parts; they should be separated by the two heads because this caustery can harm everywhere. This is the form of the caustery:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	by ça; the oignen.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the ancient "contusion cure", and you should do this for the patient who has this illness with hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions be like two eyes all along the front down to the bridge of the nose, and the other two be at each side by the eyebrows, and avoid incision of arteries that are on each side above the brows; and move your hand away from the extension of the two jawbones, with each wound being the size of three fingers apart.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have at hand a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths to dry the blood, then apply the healing ointment from two parts which is here in the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all skin that is between the two cuts up to the bone beneath it, then apply another part of the ointment from the middle incision to the other end, and then extract this ointment.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the instrument called "culteral" into the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side but on the other side is smooth, not cutting. And that's its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Insert the sharp edge of the tailor towards the chest near the root, and the smooth edge toward the bone, inserting it until reaching the middle opening. Close all vessels branching from the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to where it opens at the root, then continue on both sides through the middle opening until you reach the other end; then withdraw blood evenly, and express the wound for collected blood; then place a piece of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with soaked cloths in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring that abscesses do not form; after three days remove the ligature, and apply large amounts of water-soaked plantain, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	As for the eyes, they are blinded or do not see properly due to this condition.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When to any come frequent catarrhs as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with weakened vision, and burning of the papers; and the hair falls out, and at its source there is great pain, and the patient sneezes; then by these occurrences it shows that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from a single cause, but rather multiple veins, and the lesion lies within them.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in front of him, and another wide one. Then begin from the incision at the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the cut reach until the bone; keep your hands away from the nerves around the temps when eating; and once the bone is exposed, drain all the blood onto a sponge, then place cotton wool between the two lips of the incision, then wrap with bandages soaked in wine and oil, and beware of heatstroke; if it becomes infected, it must be cleansed until new growth begins, then treat with things that cause purification.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wormwood, and make an ointment with it; and apply it to the wounds to cleanse them thoroughly.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From stopping up of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, beast matter, fragments of minerals or similar substances as iron; seed-like materials such as hailstones, peas, and beans; or fluids flowing like water easily and seemingly so.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it flows from the ear in any form other than something that naturally belongs to the ear and does not grow therein, place the ear in sunlight. If you see a stone or similar object being discharged along with some violet oil or ointment of saffron, then proceed with extraction; and it causes sneezing as a condition, and they stop up their nostrils when sneezes come, and place cloth pieces or wool near the ear; and elevate the ear above. Often this treatment brings relief; but if it does not, then apply fine pincer-like instruments for extraction, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps up at the pinceres, that's good; if not, prepare extraction with a subtle double-needled hook; and if it does not come out this way, make an ear wax candle and push its head through the hole or ear canal strongly, stuffing around the candle with soft beeswax so the blood vessels cannot enter when using the candle; then treat properly, as often it comes up just as we have mentioned; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take grease where it goes into the joints, and use some precise instrument for that purpose, placing a bit of cotton around it; then press on the wart or whatever it is, and treat properly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things we have mentioned, quickly make an incision in the ear so that pus comes out and spasms occur; then the method of the incision is to first bandage the patient's head securely, extract blood according to its severity, then have the patient sit with their hands holding the ear upwards, making a small cut at the root of the ear near the fat or whatever it depends on; and make the fissure as round as a crescent moon until you reach the wart, then treat it as best as you can, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain as you can extract; and then take the hairs like this method according to form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision at the grain of sand. But do not attempt this when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many attempts; then extract with fine forceps and suction as we have said, so that the extractions be aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Therefore when the water comes into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first and fill the ear with old cotton. Place the same substance as close as possible over that ear where the water is. If it falls out easily, this is good; if not, take multiple pieces according to the size of your fingers held loosely together, heat them slightly, then put a piece in the patient's ear and push through. On the other side of the head, puncture another spot with an arrowhead or needle; continue piercing from one hole to another until all the water has come out, thus making it completely clear; if you see any remaining fluid, take a reed, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other until the thinner part burns off. Then use different pieces as necessary until all the water is gone, as we have described for the piercing technique.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the object, if it is small like a flea and similar in nature, treat as we have described for division; but if it is large enough to be felt, prepare extractions with forceps; and it is easier to remove what is lodged within the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have discussed in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy is not effective, then you must examine the ear under sunlight; if there are no worms, use fine forceps, and if they do not appear, grasp the hole where the form was.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow above and wide below. Then insert the finer end into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then gently pull out all the worm; do this often until all the worms are removed. If they don't come out, wrap cotton around the hole as I have mentioned in stone removal; if they still don't come out, administer distillations that the elders have tested through worm excision, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, it is as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It is made of silver or copper and has small openings above and holes to pour out the distillation through a well-made copper instrument for this purpose, and if you see a screw and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and as much medicine in the hole as you see, so that it fills the ear. Then place all the cotton on the screw and press with your warm hand until the oil is distilled out of the ear; and let the patient smell the maladies within, and the distillations are a cupful over fire just as he does this in the ear where it distills; but keep that it not too cold because medicine would be not so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear blockage
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any piercing in the ears; and this same thing happens at home with ear blockages from wounds or foreign objects inside the ear, and these blockages never occur entirely within the ear if one cannot see them; and it never happens that a little bit of defecation goes through the piercings, and sight is still good.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If one cannot see the blockage that comes entirely inside if it can't be seen, and is of severe healing but in various positions, and here are the work is this appearance:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And with a hook and cutting in front and back plainly, so that it does not bruise the ear; if the operation is of the cartilage or bone of the ear, grasp it with fine pincers, and hold it gently until all the bones are exposed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operation is partially in the ear, take a fine rasp and carefully smooth it with heat, then place or bone of the ear. If you feel the operation causing the patient great weakness to hearing, gently pierce, but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent according to the size of the opening in the ear, oiled with Egyptian balm.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do anything for a day until the wound is bound, then take a tent and oil it with rosewater, and powdered antimony on top; if you see the ear swelling, it is fitting to replace the tent and place another oiled tent made of rosemary oil and beeswax, so that when the swelling has been bone, heal until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	When bleeding persists, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remed cuing to stop the blood flow which are used for treating dropsy.
de la char des papieres	From removing parchment layers.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes from parchment papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tweezers and pincers, then coat them with a solution of its roots; afterward, place on the blue vitriol paste.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	If not removed by cutting, if the fine caustic is applied with a lenticular cautery after the incision heals, and many times it repairs; but sometimes nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn up and do not return.
de la gresle	Of chalk
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times they come in parchment things that seem like chalk in their shape and hardness, and thus this illness is called "grandine", consisting of a large amount of moisture under and over the skin; its treatments are as follows: take care if the grandine moves on one side or another, and it's an easy thing to know how to do. Then make the incision wide, then gently scrape each part, then grasp with tweezamoins, and pluck out. If you don’t pierce through a bit of skin, nothing will hurt the patient; and if there is a large tear, bind it with stitches until healed; and if small, do not apply force, because the ointment will restore it quickly without further harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	When the gravel is descending into the depth of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and extend it with tweezebts; and if the paper is moved by the incision, nothing matters; and when the gravel has been contained, cleanse the wound with salt water, and care for its healing until the patient is well again.
de la graisse des eulz	From the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	The excerpt describes seborrhea, an oiliness that is found in the pores of children's skin, which occurs mainly in infants and causes much irritation to their eyes; they rub it with matinees (cloth), and cannot gaze upon sunlight because tears fill their eyes so quickly due to this. Therefore, they lie down on their faces upwards, sleeping thereon, and have cloths over their moist eyelids which the seborrhea has covered; when you press it with your thumbs and feel its presence within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the operation is such that the patient places their head in the saddle; then take a strip of linen and construct a tent shaped like a circle according to the amount contained by each part, then place it over them; press with your hands on both sides so that the abscesses are united within the circle; then make a slit at the spouting end sharply wide, and not wider than the incision made in the vein's skin; and keep making cuts into the fat until you reach the abscess; and in various positions comes the drainage from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the pus from everything with a piece of torn fabric between your fingers and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and keep that you do not approach the incision, so that you go through all the abscess until the end, without tearing it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the abscess does not open at the beginning of the incision, then gently widen the incision slightly until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with strips and water, and place on top, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in such men who crack their joints and place them to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat until it is sound again. And if an abscess comes at its place, cleanse with emollients until it becomes sound.
des poilz des papieres	Of hair from parchment papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from parchment papers in a manner different than natural and become aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about habits of diseases as with accustomed tears and softening of the paper and pus, leading to destruction of the eyes; and there are cures according to four ways: either by fire-cauterization together with heat or medicinal ague depending on what is written in this chapter regarding caustery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cataracts as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of oil with your left hand; if it's twisted, it's good; if not, insert a needle through all one thread over; and let this be near the edge of the paper where hair grows near these hairs, and draw one thread over the entire paper, then turn it under the razor; then place in the area below the paper, close to the hairs, covering the whole swelling from the large corner to the small; then extract a filament, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then press on the paper with an imprint as the reed's bellows, ensuring that the imprint matches the amount you observe raising the paper which is separated at all times.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	If you need to remove a large quantity of the paper according to how much it is softened; then make cuts over the entire swelling on the two lines you marked, and begin from the large corner down to small; and let there be a natural split in the growth near the hairs, then insert the needle into one of the corners with your thumb, then scrape off completely; then join the two edges together with stitching by all one thread of fine linen, remove any blood, and trim excess threads over both eyebrows as needed; and if not, don't worry about it, but leave the suture and filaments until 3 or 4 days; then treat the wound without dry and constricting bandages because the paper will rejoin to the healing of the wound and assembly, but the stitches are movable (as the ancients say), and it is a procedure without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	the is not the s. The bloods and it bees ansi let; then heal of d’d as tu se pecking de; et li so exemploco to let bile, the f tient et:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then follow those who ascend with small, evenly matched strengths according to the form here shown.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the pieces are not equal in size, take a needle where appropriate. Wrap one thread around your figure, then wrap another thread near its upper rim, third fil at the small rim, and evenly combine both threads; then lift your hand equally and remove all skin over which you have marked, as we have described, then join the two edges of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy. If an abscess appears at your incision site, soothe it with cerote and other soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And never is it the case that hair from the paper is converted to skin: if it's necessary for you to use what we have described about incision; but the stitching in both places is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of fractures is as follows: and you convert the paper and fold it inside according to what I have said, and then make two splints using art; and two delicate bandages also long like the paper and the width equal to that of a palm; then wrap each side around where you hold the wires; then join one and the other carefully above what rises from the folded paper at its end, and strain the two fractures firmly; leave them thus for several days, and the sutured skin will die, dry up, and scab over, as it heals.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed and the wrapping becomes too tight, then treat until it heals properly; and if the wound is swollen and the paper cannot hold any more hairs, then you will make the two splints according to this figure and quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Fold the paper in this way: then pierce with the hair, and cut off one or two of them all. Pierce until all that is as they are very small, and fold it in such long it's length and wide as a palm; then place where you bind both ends together gently above what rises from at its end paper below, and the same way like this here:
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et if the growth is treated and hair does not come out with it, you will pull the growth from below along the entire thread as ordered, until the growth comes out strongly through the opening above and can be seen by eye; then you will pull the growth and thread, remove the oil and leave them closed for two or three days so that the hair hardens in its place and a head grows over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural edge of the eyebrow, raising it until it is extended out and then removed.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the inflammation of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or inflammation of the eye occurs in two ways: naturally and unnaturally. And it happens due to sudden injury, surgery, or cauterization, as well as similar causes.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment for it is to split that suture, and separate its lips, and place lin threads inside, and tie them until they are clean; and it does not matter if you use in his healing things that dry up and tighten. For if you do this, his illness worsens more than the original; but work with things softening, such as fenugreek; and dew or elevated water and linseed cooked seed, and ointments infused with any of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and treat that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your treatment is that you must ensure it does not rejoin in accordance with its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are sole cued for this illness to prevent recurrence in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the clotting substance found within the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and splits and cauterization and similar things; the nature of its work in it that you take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and the needle with the hole at the head, and pierce through to the right side so that the threads come out in two heads of the needle; then extend the needle upwards completely along the entire awl, and the cover to a width of a span.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper's shape returns as it should, that is good; if not, take some resin and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper; and let the tips of the scissors from the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision you made, and form them so that when they are joined together, the shape is like a letter with "J" shaped hook; then remove that needle according to the amount that its sides come out or in, as it affects the paper, then bring together the divided parts, and bind them with wool thread; then care for this as we have said of mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease is different and must be shaped like it should return; according to this and healings and in various forms of naturellement, cares lesions: Et se il est facize que covient. En out de la maladies soiant mieles a li formet qui revenir sont les saiges quidexacriger.
dou soudement de la papiere	With great care of parchment paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs on the skin in such a way that the parchment paper above is well sealed with egg white, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it then follows that you should puncture with the tip of a razor underneath the paper, and lift upwards; and apply pressure with tweezeboarers until you scrape off what has adhered to the delicate glue, which is neither too tough nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot endure if the glue becomes overly sticky or weakens the oil; and make your incision where you peel apart the assembled parts gently, so that the parchment resumes its natural shape; and it will heal entirely without any sign of greenish water in the oil, but with clear water and collagen. Then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and cover the oil with shredded wool abundantly mixed with egg white; and after three days, use gentle pressure with collodion until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Concerning the nail of the oil (referring to a method in medieval medicine that involves using an oily substance for treatment)
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the gout is of two kinds: one nervous and resembling hard sores, and another not nervous but resembling frozen wet swelling, which when touched with a piece of iron during cauterization cannot be moved; both types begin towards the great joint, and grow slowly until they cover all sight and light as well as movement in the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of the incision is such that the patient places their head in trust, then works with his eyes; he removes paper to your hand, then bends the nail into small doublets using a piece of iron, and extends it upward; then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or wool, or ox hair, and strong thread; pierce the tip of the neednose slightly and push through the nail, attach the nail with a thread and extend upwards, scrape along all the hair-side near the nail to its root and skin down to the head, then cut off any remaining spatulous flesh at its base; leave the natural cornea or large spot intact so that by incision tears do not flow as usual; never should they be extended only with a needle threaded through it, but rather scraping all the fine tissue of which this form is composed.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatulous tissue does not touch it and the cornea should be punctured, and then anoint with a little oil in the eye for a day or soak with a linen; and let it dry until healing is done with this treatment of ce qui est li l’aygidieret. Then after incision therein take a pus a lait, and if it should be cleaning.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle, and the hooks do not enter it, this resemblance of a nail is often treated with medicines; they grow as I described in the section, and when you see it covered, work on the oil for the patient's comfort, and apply a light plaster according to these instructions:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently remove the nail and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a residue afterwards, distill from your mouth into the oil collier made of litargire and red wax, stuffing the oil until the next day; then resume the other treatment as per this method, until it is completely gone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is opposed to you in the oil, as for abscesses, then wash it out, and cure first the inflamed abscess until it is cleaned, then resume the treatment as before, until it is cleaned.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh on the elbow is greatly damaged by its use, suspend it with a splint and wrap part but not all, so that no pus comes forth; then a red fluid distills into the neck vein, which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From underneath the eyebrow where it arises
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are some men who have redness beneath the eyebrow at times, covering the pupil and pressing against the skin and turning away from the forehead; and such cases are like rosebush thorns. Firstly, make the patient rest their head on a pillow, then work the eyelids and remove all unnatural growths as far as possible with force; next, cut off the first redness, shave it completely to the end, and take care that no hair grows back in the operated area; and perform an incision of the spathe as we have said in the cutting of the nail and the small forces by which one removes a stye.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	When the incision is completed and bone fully exposed, apply oil from a sealed or distilled churn along with red pigmented cordial and similar corrosive medicines, placing cotton soaked in egg whites to ensure warmth; if there's no discharge, and wound heat subsides, treat the hot abscess with things that calm it, then return to your treatment until healthy, enscuing bone is held in place by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you align the treatment of each weak oil with nature's course; and in surgical work, for accidental cases; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from such a procedure.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Red marks appear over the eye, and they obstruct sight and weaken the eye daily. Therefore, when you first look at the eye in which redness is present, examine it thoroughly; there are no other illnesses besides this redness; then treat it thus: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, and gently stretch out those veins along its entire length according to your wisdom, enscribing them twice subtly as follows:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two lines drawn by degrees in one curve following this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully draw those veins subtly, and let the blood flow out again after some time, until you see that those veins are removed from the eye; and be careful not to blister the edges of the eyelids, and perform this procedure at midday in front of the sun, and be very attentive during your operation so that only those veins remain; and when you have done this, if there is a yellow-red discoloration on the sclera, it means to cure what remains underneebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you are unable to grasp it all at once in that hour, make a poultice of soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is eased and assured from inflammation, then resume according to this method as long as they remain sane; and this is the form of strength.
de la fistule de l’oil	From the abscess in the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The so-called "arissati" abscesses: when you treat it with cautery and hot medicinal water as I have previously mentioned, and if it is not healed, then use a tool to pierce the abscess at the spot where it must die, draining all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	When the bone is uncovered and you see corruption and darkness, return to all parts of the tool from which its form comes; it is called "rough head," and should be made of fine iron for one chief point, and pointed as a file in this present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it over the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press with your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore its original position with medical cleansing remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is loose and comes out, and the body of the bowel is loose, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no accident occurs, know that it is healthy; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula at the nostril according to this form: it must be uncovered from the bone for a second time with iron, and with aging medicines, and when it is uncovered, take an instrument as described herein; the head of the iron should have three angles, and the shaft should be thinned until you see thus.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the cheek, and keep your hand away a little, then turn around completely as long as it pierces the bone and causes pain to the patient because of this if they hold their hand close to their nose; and then restore its original position with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when pus forms and hardens on the wound, the matter goes to the nose; thus it is easier for the sick person.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the nostril
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyebrows are completely open and do not cause blockage or narrowing in the nose, then tie up the patient; then wash it, then apply compresses or a soft cloth to draw out pus without causing harm, then put oil made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolum, and strain the oil, and place bandages and linens on top; and wrap the patient in these linens so that you choose soft enough linens, and double each one four times, and then layer them with one on another according to the amount needed by the eye. Then strain it from above a hard board, and begin applying compresses again for drawing out pus without causing harm; then remove the compresses and let the oil drain day and night, and if the resin softens greatly, so that you need to extract it completely; then remove the resin after one day and night, and if the oil returns, it is good; if not, reapply the bandages and linens and resin and compresses as long as necessary.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a veil seen
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When such disruptions come to the veil seen, then opening occurs and it comes from particles like a grain of resin, and is hopeful to see; thus you should cut the area below up to that above, then insert one needle into the root of the part down to the edge, then another needle or if there is a double thread in the part at the lower margin; pierce it through, leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then cover it with the place doubling and tie off a portion of the vein around it, and pull tightly, then extract the needle and put over it a cloth soaked in oil in abundance; let it remain until the thread breaks away from the vein, then treat the wound with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never should the wound be restrained by the vein each part of a circle of fabric, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the veins give great appearance, pierce at a subtle part near the edge of the wound, and allow the whiteish moisture to rise upwards and descend into the veins, and enter quickly; then extract as much as it is cleaned.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bow of the joint
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not merely a bow that appears in the joint like water pouring out; its appearance of treatment is such that you make the patient sit on a specially prepared and upright seat, then take their head with both hands until you see the bow coming up to your level. Then it should be fixed firmly, and do not dissect or uncover the lumbar area, observe if the patient feels as usual; but if they don't feel that way, know that it is water, and if the shape of the bowstring is not aligned as we have said, make them sit between your hands again, then take a subtle spatula and apply it on the horny part with one spot continuously connected to the horny area and crown, until the bow rises; and when it does rise, drip hot sweetened water or water boiled with fenugreek into the joint, then cure it further until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the joints
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	In the division of joints resembling those in water, what is appropriate for cutting; thus following health guidelines. It should be done that you have the patient sit between your crossed hands under dim light to avoid sunlight and apply a clean ointment firmly, then place the paper with oil on your left hand if it's right-handed or on your right hand if it's left-cupped; then take in your right hand (if right-handed) the instrument called "almagda" or with your left hand (if left-handed); then position the tip of the instrument near the crown by slightly shifting a ray beneath the paper to oil, and feel that almagda arrives at the empty thing; it is necessary for the path of almagda to be as wide as possible from the space between the plumb and its end. This is the crown of oil; if you see bones through the paper due to the whiteness of the horn-like cloth, then place the instrument up until reaching where the fluid exists, then press out a way afterward. If the fluid descends now, you will see in front of you the patient and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting for a while and the fluid rises again through another route, apply heat with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise further, gently rotate almagca around your hand little by little; then put back some gemstone wax, and oil within. Then place poultice or soft cloth soaked in oil rosette on top abundantly mixed with uef. We, and those of our time, place comin broiet with an abundance of uef.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	et ou.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Therefore pierce the joint only slightly, not too deeply, but with a very fine needle, then apply an emollient as we have said; and at the completion of the work provide the patient with a comfortable resting place in which he may sleep on his back in a darkened room; ensure complete immobility except for light meals, and do not move his head to the right or left, maintain them according to their natural position until three days have passed; then remove him from that same dimly-lit house, test his vision, let him see various things, and then reattach the ligament up to the seventh day; it is not necessary for this to be done during the hour of healing or immediately after an incision, but rather wait until swelling subsides quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If abscesses arise, remove the dressing before the seventh day and apply poultices that soothe the abscess; once it is calmed, reopen the wound and place a bandage over its face for a full day, keeping it in that darkened house. Then gradually leave the house little by little, and allow him to resume his usual activities; know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And there is one, but the time de la pluste les chaument on quittances de nos avecque nous esprend, and then li qui les poins que le texte lor nenet, et almagde tout ne estrange a li veus se c.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the forms of alchemy, for those who do not know them see them as such; and they are truly foolish.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And there are heads of this same subtlety, and they have three corners each.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot to the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never do chariots of various kinds appear in the neck; some resemble scorpions with many stings; and if there are any such chariots with furious colored wheels or wheels that are white like bone. In those cases where a chariot is white but not attached, one must make the patient sit between their hands towards the sun; work on its nostrils, pour oil into them, cleanse the axle and trace along the lines; then cover what you can support at the subtle spatulous end of a bone, until you know that chariot is completely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be removed, work on all subtle veins lightly until nothing is left; and if the patient becomes swolculed or an abscess appears, treat them accordingly; and if it's malignant, haste to cauterize until they are completely excised and turned into bones, then pour oil or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the treatment fails and moisture reaches up to the palate, believe that it is clean; if moisture does not penetrate as it should, suspect there is infection in the bone above, which prevents proper healing: then you must wrap a linen thread around. Make it somewhat thickened with hands, and leave space between each knot; place the patient's head under the thread so firmly that they can move slightly, pull gently until it slides into their mouth; this method is often used for children in schools, and it is an easy task for those who must perform it. Hold one side of the head with one hand and the other side with the other hand, feeling each knot as you go along. Continue doing so until you are sure that our thread has loosened any impuramoins; then draw out the pus, treat the linen with Egyptian ointment, and place it back in its original position on either side of the nose; do this for three days or more, as long as the ointments dissolve all residual impurities. Then cover one nostril with a cotton plug until healed, and if there is need of dry medicines, use them accordingly; this method cleanses the head using an instrument designed to distil oil and medicine through it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is made of silver or glass, resembling an open lamp similar to a flame, and you guide them the same way; and if you see one needs it, make it closed with no protrusions for purging the head; and have one hand holding the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease arises in the head of the neck called "telul", which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, one must cut it at the beginning, and the bone entirely, then apply the cautery or burning medicine on it; if not done quickly before it becomes too large, be vigilant that it may be hard, of a strange color, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an incurable boil, for whenever one cuts it even once, the patient suffers greatly; and if the boil is from a tender spot, not of a strange color, then you see that you can completely cauterize it, so relieve the patient and do not fear, and treat drying things and tightening.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut and sutured.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If solutions for continuation come one of these cartilages are damaged, there is little benefit in any person; and it does not happen to anyone, so that as far see if the wound fresh blood all his blood, then stitches both sides two lips together, then heals until whole, and poudre with dragon's blood on it, and let them be suture. And if one side is torn apart from either part of either side both together, and cure so you inward a little.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you gather the solutions: by needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing; or by thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the lips have an abscess that is hard like grains of barley and are small to larger in size; then you must turn the lip apart, split them at each spot, grasp with forceps on each side, place the leeches therein for each part; after the incision with vitriol pus flows out until it is cleaned away; then apply a soothing ointment and treat the lips until they are dry.
de la char des gencives	From the edge of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often it arises under the gums from being pushed backward, which the ancients called "albulus"; if necessary, support it with forceps, and cut to its root, allowing blood or pus to flow; then apply vitriol salt on the wound or other drying powders; and if that edge returns after cutting, and often this happens, second time cauterizing: it does not return after cautery; these are forms of abscesses to treat.
des sordens	Of ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	in ousle chiktustsd
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating the tooth of its pain, take time to extract it as much as you can, for one must not leave any part behind; for it is a matter so high that there is no excuse for leaving any remnants.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained to extract a tooth, it should be certain that you are sure of a decayed tooth; often pain precedes the patient, and they think it's a healthy tooth, so pull out the bad tooth; however, do not cease the pain by this means until the evil is removed, for we have tried this with such healers before; and when you are well certain of a decayed toebone, ensure that you scrape around it thoroughly to protect all parts of the gum. Then move the jaw using your fingers or fine tweezers in small increments until properly aligned, securely holding the tenailles tightly afterward; and make sure the head of the healer is placed firmly between the genous, ensuring no movement.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth properly without breakage, if it does not come loose easily, take any of these bindings and stuff them inside from each side gently, and move the jaw as you have previously done. And if the root is pierced or mixed up, ensure that you fill it with gauze; and when using fine tweezers to extract, do so without causing a breakage; work very carefully around the gum to protect the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Ensure that you do not break it and leave a part of it intact, allowing it to return painfully due to the root's malevolence. Be careful not to act as ignorant surgeons do, who with haste and boldness often break any cartilage without heeding what we have discussed; instead, they bring about great illness from the venom of such a fracture or because they break the cartilage itself, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash it with wine or oil and salt; if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply the lees of vitriol; and if that does not suffice, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the molars where teeth first move should have sharp points and large cheeks so that they do not double when you pull out a tooth. And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	They should have large bodies such that they do not bend when extracted, and be well-made of iron, with teeth to grip it firmly.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root stays in place after extraction, it is necessary to put cotton moistened with butter at the site for one or two days until the area is numb, then insert pliers called "algefri" so that the head seems like a bird's beak; and inside they are shaped like files:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out with all these pliers, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali," which is a chisel; herein lies its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	is they s.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two prongs; its form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments used before on teeth and of this instrument which appears to be large pliers, its form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and so f.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and firm enough to hold the bone so that it does not slip out, but can securely grip and remove it; then restore its original position with appropriate medicines for this purpose, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, use all of these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural course of the body, and its shape is unsightly, especially in young women, it must be determined whether there are nerves behind the tooth and if they are not on the right side, and cannot be felt or filed down: then scrape; and if there is a root with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is shown here, resembling .i. small beak, made of iron that has been sharpened at both ends.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth becomes harder over time for its hardness and because you dore moving others, and if it is visible that one can file it down, use a part of this file as shown in the shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Et ainsi comme le fer de cui on fait les aiguilles; et en filant les dents peu à peu, mains légèrement, si qu’ils ne se déplacent pas tant qu'ils soient affilés ; puis l'aiguise au final avec tout aucun polisseur, et s'il est trop tranchant et il blesse la langue, alors il faut aiguiser l'espèce jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit égalisée, si qu'il ne blesse pas la langue ni ne corrompt le parler.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth become loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	Wenn die Zähne locken werden oder durch Schlag oder Stumpf bleiben und das Patient schmerzen kann, wenn es etwas kaut, so dass er ausscheidet; dann sollst du ihm mit Medizinen zusammenziehend, aber nicht zu sehr fest anwenden, da diese zu stark verhindern können; stattdebrauchen Sie ein Goldfaden, denn Silberfäden werden grün und schimmen (also verderoeroeffentlich, doch goldneigt sich niemals; so soll der Faden mittelgroß. Doch wenn du siehtst, wie die Zwischenräum zwischen den Zähne: Zieh einen doppelten Schnur ziehen Sie zwei gesichern siebtet an der Zähne dazwischen - dann heilt manche essez.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is set loose, it is put back in its place repeatedly as we have said; only those who are wise and patient should be involved, never attempting the shape of a wolf's bone, placing it where it lacks, tightening it just as we have said, remaining long in this manner.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	And cut off the cord of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And never are these ligatures that come from below the tongue or nature, that one removes in this manner; and by accident of an incision made hot; and the procedures are such as to work on the mouth with the patient's head upright, and lift the tongue; then cut off the nervous cord at its base so that the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there is any hardness or swelling, and it is of a fresh wound, then you must bandage it tightly until it heals well, but not too much to avoid the artery underneath; and after doing this, raise the lymphatic sacs with warm water or cold water, and place linen gauze below the tongue. And if there are any bleeding spots on the neck each night, make sure they do not adhere. If a vein bursts, apply salted earth; and if it does not stop, then cauterize with a slow fire lancet which is good for this; then treat it again until it heals well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it of a color or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch as it is cancer; and if it appears to be swelling towards the bladder, and there is moisture, apply an ointment subtly, and relieve from both sides. If you are successful with this treatment, then subject it to vitriol broiling until it becomes firm; afterwards return to your procedure until all furuncles are treated; then lift up the lump easily and thoroughly, and treat it with other remedies until it is healthy again.
des apostemes de la gorge	For boils in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Boils in the throat are known as "godath," and they are properly called 'the two almonds'; when treating them, follow what we have said in the division. If they do not heal, be careful: if it is a boil of small sense and color, do not touch with iron. And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch with iron; similarly for blood flowing from the wound; but let them stay as long as they bleed, then you can cut or break apart when ready to heal on its own, or it will burst by itself; and if it's light in color, and the roots are subtle, prepare the instrument, but first look whether the boils rest quietly and calm. Then make the patient sit in front of the sunlight, and his head is in thy hand, and presses the tongue between its handle with iron or a little:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	As you press the tongue to all this instrument, and see the abscess, then take a string and insert it through the hole, and pull from above as much as you can; also remove any remnants with tweezeboots, then cover the instrument with a cup of that form which seems like force; and yet the head is bent, one place to another, very painful, made of iron or silver.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, use tongs for that form which is shaped like it:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And use a trenching instrument on one side, and the other for naming purposes; and when you have opened one of the holes, open the other in the same manner, then after incision gargle the patient with hot water, as well as warm water to soothe, and if bleeding occurs, gargle again with the patient using boiled quinces or rosemary leaves, and such things, until it is healed; then cure them until they are healthy. If no other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two holes, open them as you did for these two holes.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess inside her throat, which is to say, a small abscess; and it had been almost entirely closed off the entire throat, such that the woman could not exhale through the passage blocked by cotton-like tissue, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if this condition persisted for one or two days. The abscess was so swollen that it had been pushed out by two openings from within. Thus, I immediately took action, inserted a needle into one of the cords, then pulled on the thread to draw out a large portion of pus; next, I repeated this with the other opening. I opened her mouth and pressed against her tongue; afterwards, I inserted a neednose into these abscesses, extracted part of it, and there only came forth a little blood from the wound; thus the throat passage was cleared for the woman, who then began to drink water and wine, continuing to treat the abscess over long periods. The abscess would recur again, filling up the space I had emptied, becoming very large until it could not grow any more. Then I deceived it and cauterized inside her throat: so that it no longer grew; then I left those areas to God for further care after me.
de l’uve	The phrase "de l'uvre" translates to "of the work" or "from the work." However, without additional context, it is challenging to provide a more precise translation or interpretation of this term within the text. It could refer to a specific medical procedure or treatment mentioned in the larger document from which this excerpt comes.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	as a. Then; if they se ce prt is tud by the el are.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the head has a hair or hole where you place the medicine, like in a spoon's handle, and put the instrument over all of the medicine; let the patient lie on their side so saliva and muscle flakes come from their mouth into the medicine without going down to the throat or stomach; then hold your hand over the entirety of the medicine, pressing it onto the wound for a quarter hour until you see it becoming clear and the pain from the medicine subsides. If so, take cotton and wrap it around any instruments, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place all the instrument into the cup of the cotonnets; continue this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to reapply the medicinal cauterization, do so, followed by wiping around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse what surrounds the medicine; be refreshed with cold water, and rinse your mouth with gargles until healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more beneficial of the incision rather than the cauterization; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and yellowwort and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, mixing all or some of them into a pot, adding water, and bringing to boil. The pots should be tightly sealed with strong clay, and within the pot there must be an instrument inserted in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	:
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens in the throat at the jaw or spine of a fish, or any other thing; therefore you must examine what you can see, and press the tongue towards the sun along all instruments until you see movement; and if there is nothing to pry open but is returned to the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it may be prodded out by the vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread; and with the sponge tie some thread to it, then transfer it through the throat. And when it reaches its place, you will probe, and then examine further; and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the probe be inserted at the throat so that it can more easily enter into the gorge, and keep the head lifted high; and be cautious not to touch the epiglote so as not to obstruct or push inside any bone; move until the patient inserts the instrument because something is stuck out. Then pull upward, or examine thoroughly with all instruments equally until it's removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	And in a similar manner; and then remove without getting deeper; or you do not penetrate further.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	On no occasion is medicine without effectiveness, as I have said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit them at all, then look into the throat of the patient by sunlight, then press their tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the swelling, treat it with a little needle or fine pincers as appropriate. And if these do not suffice, take a hollow quill, place it in the patient's throat and pour hot iron into it repeatedly. And if the patient is discolored from blood all day, then boil a jug of cold water, work their mouth, let them swallow sensibly, and move it with your hands often; and as soon as the swelling feels the water, it will drain.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not drain as we have said, then smoke the patient with camphor, using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of wine; do this many times, for it will draw without pain. The method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are charcoal embers, and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and place the head of the instrument through that hole; then pour your fumigation, and let the patient put their cheek on the end of the tube, sealing their mouth so that no smoke escapes but travels to the swelling; now the swelling will draw out, and if it does not drain, repeat the fumigative process many times. Allow the patient to have thirst and consume dirty things and salted foods, but do not drink water; and eventually they must pass through this treatment regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	the fire the c. Et, and of the f li ft. It is not. And will it for swallow with vin, and let to the in the ointinis unce. The en ligne themes est à l’est s, ousoie et quadratine; and are so they telle. ould de ce n'ast cite the gela pecta butt.
li chapistres des apostemes	The surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, as one's memory recalls from this book and various other sources; they differ in perforation and cutting techniques, with two main methods - one similar to the other but influenced by moisture. The first method is for those that occur on limbs within the body, while the second method applies where abscesses appear as joints. For instance, an abscess atop the head differs from one at the base, and an abscess in a hollow area varies from those in joints; each has its own approach in treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If at an abscess one must not yet perforate it until the swelling is fully developed; and for those that require incision when they are ripe but do not wither according to their development, as with abscesses near joints - such ones behave differently than others. When an abscess occurs near a joint, if left to develop completely, there's a risk of corrupting the ligament and nerve in the joint area; this may lead to contraction in that limb. If an abscess is near the main limb and one delays perforation until it's fully matured, it will harm the main limb; if it is near the base, incise it before full ripeness - do not perform a procedure on those near the base unless they have spread extensively inward and formed an abscess channel. It should heal within a reasonable time frame rather than persisting unresolved for too long.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be known the time of abscess perforation when healing is complete, and this is when pain is alleviated, fever subsides, and reduction in pain and redness occurs, along with debilitation and sharpening of the headache from the abscess, and other signs; and it must be that you place the abscess perforation to depend on its location relative to the abscess, and where movement is possible. The perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, in all similar cases without swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And in those that bulge, according to the affected limb. And if the abscess is at the neck region, let the perforatur remain until it confirms complete digestion as we have said. For if you cut before it, it will extend poison throughout its body and be full of much filth; and sometimes harden the lips and deep wounds within. And for any abscess that are perceived according to the width of the body, depending on what the limb requires. And it must be that you treat small abscesses with small perforations; and large abscesse
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	the former thei; and then est a se peissamme telle pue ben tre jour il'heu de la so quet;
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs in your operation area, treat with cool and soothing water and a cloth, moistening the wound frequently. And if bleeding persists, provide proper care and use the powders mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the place of suture or abscess is very sensitive, you should place warm, moistened tents and cloths; and if it's summer, and the area or abscess is fleshy, you should apply dampened tents and cloths with cool water or oil and vinegar until after three days as we have said; then remove the sutures and drainage and treat accordingly until healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And you must know this universally for treating abscesses: here is what I have told you about how to proceed with the treatment of abscesse, and now comes the chapter.
des soros	About pus. (The word "des" in Old French can mean both "of" or "from", so it's often a matter of context)
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	When small abscesses occur on the head and are treated in ways similar to those of an animal's joint, there are many types; some are moist like hairs while others are hard and painful when touched, with no doubt or fear when using a tool called "entromissoire," from which shapes arise afterwards, depending on what they contain. If it contains moisture, they emit through the length above. And when the moisture is drained, scrape without leaving any hair that contains such moistcuire; for it reappears as soon as you leave anything there; then soak a cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise use water and salt, and apply to the wound until the next day. And again begin with the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure it does not remain night-long; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until healed. If an abscess is greasy, follow this method: lengthwise; apply a poultice, drain any pus, scrape all parts, and administer care as if milking from where it lies; and if the tool acts contrary to you, do what I have previously instructed. Similarly treat an abscess that is hard like bone or flesh.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And if an abscess on the skin is hard and moist, it contains less blood. And among such abscesses or chiefs without moisture are those I described as being like a head of an old woman; and found an abscess similar to a long bone, rough and swollen, which could not be broken through; and if one had struck any, they would have treated it just as with a stone. In other abscesses that come on the head or at the roots of ears, make sure to open them fully every day for moisture to escape; and treat accordingly.
des scrophules	the f h. Manze de lapeccest c's.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and below the shoulders, and in arms, and they do not appear elsewhere on the body, and are very large, and interconnected with each other. Each boil is properly within its own spot, just as we have described for the abscess of the head; and there are many appearances of these boils. Some contain moisture, and others have malign tendencies that do not wish to obey health. Therefore, in those cases where you see good disposition at touching, and resembles the color of the body, and is painless from all sides and is not inflamed on the neck or artery or vein, and is not deep; it should be cut open from above, and each part scraped off, and extend the two lips of flesh to stitches as needed, just as we have described for abscesses in the head; and treat slowly but surely, and make sure you do not nick the nerve or vein, nor leave any spongy tissue or cutting edge, so that your fingers escape unharmed, and do not go too far forward, beyond what is necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow work, then apply vitriol paste or powders that draw blood to the wound, and press the ward; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and softened, and begins to decay. And when the pus has escaped, return to your treatment, as long as you need to complete it; then look for small boils if any remain, cut them out and cleanse them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the boil, do not cut this boil at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang without harming anything; then dress the wound with gauze soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	the les que il � le t'homme so that isnt ae:ld Jonsme. Ce.
de squinance	Of quinsance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the throat incision; but I never saw it done in our land, and it is through their writings that we know of this.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with quinsy, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat called "epiglottis" be cleared; and you cannot aid by this method because all the veins and the main part of the malaise are at a boil in cases of abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottebefore three or four circles, or between them with a small cut across the width of the incision, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Et ceux-là se tiennent courbables à la section de l'épiglotte, sans aucun défaut, et les vessies sont longues en quantité.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, it must be extended with leather around the entire neck, then cut through the skin until reaching the chin; and avoid blood vessels, unless you see something, and then close the sack as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the throat vein which bursts through where it has been torn, and due to the defect in voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Leave the open wound uncovered for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the time has passed for doubting a strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound so that they are joined; then apply remedies which promote healing and make it whole until it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Not until the throat is completely blocked will you do this; and if the patient appears to be dying, and lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then seal the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe through their mouth, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And therefore instructed the physicians to leave the open wound until the illness is healed, and it takes three or four days for this to occur.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up and clean the wound until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	by: (1 v...
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I went called to cure him, and found him just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it, but was well that it had not caused swelling or a tight band to choke the throat; however, there was severe bleeding through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I tended quickly and stitched the wound, then healed it as much as possible.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	par lis they he ne lesse d, at; puis; to se est the next. Theng tir ig so that he c e's such as much que I don' s.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	In treating of the epiglottis, there must not be any fear.
de la grosse gorge	From a swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These boils are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses in the color of jet, and occur often in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	a so or shee:
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	The occurrence is in two ways - one appears like fat on us and the other way seems like an abscess coming from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it does not bode well to operate on large wounds; instead, test and seek out all the underlying causes.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as in our flesh and not attached to any vein, then cut it off, as one would skin oneself, and treat the wound thoroughly if there are any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	byz;
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways that we have, of which I will tell all the kinds.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now it is necessary for me to explain all the differences that exist between them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an abscess is heat and fever-bearing, as long as the boiling persists, and decay is complete; then rests the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	We do not have heat or fever or pain, and contains a vesicle, which is its own bag and corresponds to the body's color, and begins like wax, and becomes larger.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	c; O for le bon se o lire they n's.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When attending to this matter, first examine and inquire about the entire instrument called "entromissor," according to its form or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inquiring about abscesses in our bodies is to grasp or find more moisture where you think it lies within the abscess and turn its edges slowly until you know that the essence has perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromissor, and be careful not to hurt it further.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture persists within a wound, until it changes color as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the interpositor does not come moisture, say that it is greasy, then apply crosswise as I have said, and hold in tweezebers, and lightly scrape from each side and keep the coat where it lies to treat with a nut.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	that it so:
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	If left untreated for a while, it returns to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lingers a bit and the wound grieves him, apply some powders of corrosive agues to the wound, bind the wound, and place soothing substances on the abscesses and treat with other remedebut only until he is well.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it is large, remove the two edges of the wound and treat with a remedy that prevents infection.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If it is contrary or another urgency occurs and you hastily apply the lead of vitriol paste, leave it for two days or three, until the wound heals, then allow the bleeding to subside; afterwards return to its original state as was delayed before.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	See here the forms of entangled intestines, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three sections called "albaret," and one called "breb," and there are again three ways: large, medium, and small, to search for abscesses in a fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are similar to the needles used in witchcraft, which can be of citrine stone, iron, or silver, and yellow-tipped ones are most effective, while those with a black tip are more useful for searching for pus pockets in a fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the openings in question.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of tumors are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and in tumors that have two kinds with three different approaches.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are tumors that have three types of protuberances and come in three different ways; and if there are tumors with two kinds of protuberances, but only one type overall, and they also come in three different ways; all these are necessary at their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The principal types of these that cut are sharp, and among those there are some that do not cut anywhere except in one direction, which we scrape the skin off, so as to avoid cutting the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And among these intrusions are displaced nails reset in small pieces so that the patient does not perceive pain at the onset of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And it should not be used except in the case of swollen joints such as legs, arms, elbows, and other limbs.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	�e with theilloe market line.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And you put it back into place at times with blood flow from veins, and arteries, and sometimes they return according to this major form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never do the breasts swell on some men when they begin to be corrupted, appearing like female breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swolebreathed, and if one wishes to treat them according to this line B. until G:.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and treat the wound with medicinal chalk paste, then bring together the two edges of the wound to sew them up, and close it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the tissues become relaxed below, and are softened by their size as it happens in women, then make two slits above them with similar incision cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is held to the other at each end, with the larger line containing the smaller in this manner, from this line down to the line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and do as we have said with stitching and powders, and anything necessary for the treatment, until it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not clean, or the incision has not been properly made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a soft cotton cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until all the remaining flesh and fat have healed over, then continue to treat it until it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses and elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from under the elbows are forms of hard goiters or swellings, and if there is any containing pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain pus should be cut according to this pattern, from line b. up to line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	the bat:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of similar nature to hard swellings, make an incision as we have described in cutting open hard swellings, and if the wound is bowed out, treat with fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of rupturing of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, there often come abscesses, and likewise, one experiences bleeding from the veins and an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	tjou. The bencule is not; this.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it in your elbows, there is extreme tightness; and when it is from the vein, there is a reason for its disappearance.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is foolish to attempt this abscess, especially when it is from the joints and tendons and veins and numerous other places, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is necessary to avoid the treatment with iron, and those who are of age must also refrain from this, and in those who have inflammation of arteries on the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work around the neck with an incision, and gently open up the artery through the veins until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle through the skin and make an incision towards the opposite side until it reaches the muscle, and tie off the artery with a double thread as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries that are behind the ears.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the lump that is between the two ligatures with an instrument until the blood flows out, and let the abscess be drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply a curative bandage until it no longer bleeds.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply an appropriate ointment to it until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	the bien that ligament, and d for peie;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then insert the needle from under the joint that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, so that there is a double thread on it; then pull it to the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess as I have told you, or join one of the two heads with the double thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt whether the thread is strong enough, then rethread with another needle through all of the threads from the abscess incision to where the first needebore was placed, and hold the strings in four loops.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then treat the abscess until excess fluid drains out, then cut away the swelling and leave what remains.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a dressing of wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	On the cords from abscesses
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	is so they le grand. Et so that: the ondce; if: 1  J. If you to not; don’t. Tort (30. JA Dex.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This often happens with shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, and it is a troublesome abscess, its color resembles the body's color, and in many cases there is pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is strangely tightened, the patient feels great pain, and it is not throughout the body, but from beneath the head.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, upwards or downwards. The one who is dislocated should not be bound with iron: perhaps there would be spasms.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those whose head or forehead is affected, they cause it with a sharp instrument.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, if you use pliers, and cut into its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they are large, tie them off with thread, then scrape and stitch the wound, and care for it until healed.
des grosses boces pendans	to make: lesse a l.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	At no time does it occur in the abdomen or elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, with fine roots and large stems; there are both small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a house where there were two stools that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no visible difference, and they were white, had fine roots, were split in half, and became damp from moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I collected them and found the one to weigh eighteen ounces, and the other five ounces. Upon making an incision in it, you observe that the sickly are moist, and the flesh color of the lining is pale and moist with fine roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the head is too wide at the shoulder, and be present with fire cautery. For in cutting often comes great loss of blood, and if it does not stop, then hasten to use cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread and tie it as we have said, leaving it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then the restraint, and do not stop tightening the thread until it holds the artery, causing some pain; but if the roots are large, beware of placing a cup on the stomach as well, however, you should cover most of the area with cups.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize so it does not recur; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the torn flesh which is of hot color, poor sense, and lacking sight.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an inflamed ulcer that needs to be treated, and I will come for the treatment of syphilis afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When there is an acute fistula
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of gangrene comes from a wound or fissure on the abdomen and in some of the intestines, as it happens in other regions, or blood leaks from veins or arteries according to what is before, or inflammation.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the rupture of the sphincter and from the release of the intestine, then the appearance of the abscess resembles that of the body's flesh color, and it is a minor thing without pain, with various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the release of the intestine, then there are more diversities, and when one presses on its sides, so it pops back out again, and sometimes it becomes hardened, and greatly expands at the opening of the bath and requires strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	If it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and easily pressed with one's hand without force; if it is for blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, and embedded according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is for inflammation, it is soft to touch, and the workings so you observe if the appearance suggests arterial blood, veins, or inflammamen
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear as I have told you in my chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestines or belly, it must be commanded that the patient soaks his leg in wine, and lies stretched out straight, then bind all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then command him to lie as if sleeping between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around his body that you have laid out completely with all your bandages,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then they extend the dressing of the abscess above all along the great bone.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then you envelop it tightly with a strong thread or cord of sturdy silk and ensure we are fully tied.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on extending the abscess over the ligament, and place your finger inside it, reaching for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find that caught in the ligament, if you dislocate it, and push the intestine towards the right side of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the swelling, if it grasps at the sinew, and cut off the excess tissue;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	t; (1 f:lue; the O’mce est aqui but whate tous.  byn or
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then straighten the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and let it remain open until healed, and expel the dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or remove it when it is subtle and ready, then treat as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract any blood or pus you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and bind it up.
dou chancre	Of a canker
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	In the division of cankers, we have explained how they should be treated with medicines and purging iron cures; let us now discuss the canker in its beginning stages, which requires great caution for treatment, and according to old texts, when a canker is present or can be removed like one that is found on the cheek, groin, or similar areas, it should be entirely eradicated from the start. However, if they are large and ancient, do not approach them as I have never seen any healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is present or can be removed as we have said, purge the patient of black bile once; then nourish them if they show signs of repletion, and prepare the patient by placing a linen cloth to make an incision; then pour on oil over all the wart(ies) or canker, along with hair and bone from every part without leaving anything behind; allow the blood to flow freely, pressing it firmly into your hand or any other material, and if bleeding occurs contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the vessel is sealed off; then apply a different remedy until they are healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have previously discussed in the section on dropsy its similarities, how assembly of water occurs within the body, signs of each type, treatment with medicines and those treated with iron; it is only so. Do not touch with iron in these two types: that is to say, tympanitis and hepatomegaly, for they are fatal conditions; therefore, when treating this dropsy condition called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment does not help, check if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsebesides dropsy such as flatulence and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt. And if you see a patient of strong vitality, who only has dropsy and is neither too young nor too old, then work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lay the patient right up against your hands and have the assistant press the belly from the outside pushing the water to the lowest part near the pelvis. Then take a spatula made of bone according to this form: And let it be a sharp cutting instrument divided into two parts, but not so long that it could reach the intestine when inserted and cause bleeding;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the dropsy is invading towards the intestines: if it must be that you make an incision above the elbow, three fingers' width from below on the hand; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then the cut should be on the left side of the elbow, three fingers' width; and if it is because of spleen, then the incision should be on the right, ensuring that no excess fluids flow there weakening its strength.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and empty it, then lift your hand to remove all fluid between the skin and fascia just as when squeezing out an almond's worth or more; then pierce the fascia until the space reaches eight fingers wide, which is where the water vessels are, then extract this vessel, and here is the instrument of its shape: It resembles a finely crafted silver chain, made of copper or brass, with one small hole at the top part; on one side it has three holes, and on another two, and yet another one. The head is shaped as if cut like a feather, and this incision shape which scribes form their quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the head above is the vessel, and when there are exudations to water, empty them onto the instrument; then drain out about one-third or half of it, for if you overfill too much in that hour, perhaps causing the patient's spirit to faint from pain.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	However, according to the amount of its virtue, and based on what the patient's physical condition signifies, and their hair; then draw the instrument and hold back the water, which is now retained by the key that blocks the passage above the armpit, as I have spoken, pierce it in this manner; then repeat with the instrument the next day if you see the patient still suffering, and draw out a small amount of fluid.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	For each day, and avoid leaving it too long but only a little water; if you have doubts about the patient, and you leave out much fluid, then treat with burial dust or hot sand, and by sweating excessively or bathing in sunlight, and drinking wine; and treat with dry medicines until healed, and cauterize above the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting fluid, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	For the stopping of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	At no time is a child born without foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or not in its proper place. If necessary, it should be pierced as soon as possible using a very fine tube following this method: then insert a very fine thread into the hole, and tie and cut off after three to four days; when urine needs to come out, untie the knot, allowing urination, and then reset it; however, sometimes there is no need for re-knotting because urine flow prevents it from closing.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the foreskin is small, it can be treated as described by us and will enlarge. Those who do not have a foreskin in its proper place are afflicted because no child is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until their penis is lifted; and they cannot impregnate due to material that does not reach the testicles, which is an unfortunate condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of its use is that the patient lies supine with their head elevated and the penis lengthened like a feather's stem; and be careful to prevent excessive blood loss which often occurs, and if it does happen, apply the tourniquet for controlling bleeding, and treat the wound until healed.
des pustules de la verge	From boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come these swellings in the penis, and it appears as an ugly growth; there are malignant and benign ones; thus you must pluck them with a fine needle, then cleanse and wash all thoroughly, then apply cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment, curing with this ointment until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the swelling is malignant, of pus color and depopulating, then you must apply fire cautery. After cleaning it, if the swelling is inside the foreskin part and partly outside, remove the swelling that is inward first; once it's removed, treat the outer part. Because when you heal them together, do not leave the head of the penis exposed to be pierced, as blackness and decay come upon its shaft causing pain; therefore, cover everything that is blackened and corrupted with honey and flour mixed from pomegranate bark and pear juice, then heal with other salves until it's healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	If blood flow changes, arrange the lunar cautery in this way: The cauterization is composed of two parts together - that is, for changing blood flow and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you insert or guide a wax cone into the penis so the patient urinates among them; and when the hairs are burned at the top of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised, occurring due to injury or abscess, then one should carefully scrape it with an instrument until the ligaments are released and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a serious matter to address this, then one should carefully scrape with a spatula just the top of the penis and hair; afterwards, separate completely between them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water on it without delay.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say the ancients did not mention child circumcision, as they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greater part of masters and authorities who performed circumcision within one day, and at all times, and in every manner; there were keys because there are two locks, and by chance a cap was placed above and below those locks.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then it is regained by pressure, and the pain doubles, and with the redness which is half due to cold, the tip of the limb is not fully secure; and sometimes during the trimming of the nail, the steel escapes from them, causing wounds, and many times they come about without needing further treatment.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mundification performed using force throughout the entire line of thread, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the forces cut exactly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand while cutting evenly throughout the entire thread of soul-tens; but let the thread be well stretched around the hide; and make it in such a way as if instructing the child, so that he understands you are only tying the thread around the rod just enough. Then release him to move freely in all manners possible;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then the member is straightened in your hands, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the strains; then put your hand on the rod and blow or shout, and pull gently until the head of the rod is raised; then cleanse thoroughly of any filth accumulated there; then tie the joint with a double thread, then secure it below .i. point to another notch; and hold as close as possible at .ij. points by the second tied area at the pouchet and indicator, connecting between the .ij. ties, then lift gently above the head and straighten the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then allow the blood to clot slowly and sparingcurosis: then put powder on it and over the wound; .i. drapeil glued with a half of an egg cooked without water, mixed with rose oil, good-quality fresh olive oil, and let it remain until the next day, and treat again as necessary until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the chisels for this procedure is as follows: the two heads should be held and sharp, and each head should be as large as a hand evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the procedure is when the core escapes during the incision; therefore, you must extend it with your fingernail so that the edges make an opening, and then cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it passes three days and what is beneath the rod is swollen, leave it until the incisions have healed, and gently scrape away; cut as you can move, but protect the part of the penis, for this will not cause any harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the sudden pain of powder wounds that we have discussed in our treatment of powders, and if one copes with it excessively causing it to go too high, do not harm; treat as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding urinary retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to blockages such as stones or frozen blood, bowel obstruction, or similar conditions that we have mentioned in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	If the urine is not discharged, and you see that there is retention due to the stone lodged in the urethra near the bladastery neck, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; then put his feet on the back, extend his belly towards the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient as much as possible. Then, one must strain the bladastery neck to expel the stone from above, so that urine is discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it still does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must prepare extraction with an instrument called a "syringe," which is of this form: made of fine, lightweight silver wire, like that of a bird's feather; and the needle should be one palm in length and half as wide, and also very fine at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	The manner of urine evacuation is as follows: take a double thread and tie on its tip a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert the end with the yarn into the syringe. Trim any excess yarn and push it up to the top of the needle, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and opium; have the patient sit on a seat, and apply oil-moistened wool and olive oil and water as needed.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches near the root of the penis, then wrap the penis over to the scrotum; next inject the syringe before reaching the bladard, and let the patient feel as if a venomous creature is coming up towards the empty thing; but this is not done in accordance with this order for it is twisted where it goes; then pull out the thread bit by bit from all the wool, and urine follows along the wool, then extract firmly, and conduct the urine properly.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Then restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relax the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Concerning diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When stitches or blood reaches the bladder, where swelling has accumulated, and you see it to be drained with waters and medicines, do so using all the instrument called "clamps", which is its form.
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if at .iii. places: .ii. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the opening wherein to insert medicine so that it thoroughly fills the vessel without addition, and from which we can extract moisture, and replace when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see to place your medicines in the bladastery, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and extract through the tube that is therein. You will drain the moisture using the bucket, then firmly replace the tube; if moisture enters it, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: so it goes.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher; from one breast the ligaments are torn. Then take an inflated sheep bladder and insert the moisture you intend to use for enema, then tie between two breasts with a strong double thread, heat some of that moisture over fire; then introduce the top part of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladeroid as soon as the patient feels that moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, piercing it evenly all around; then insert a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle as one would with a leather bag, and put inside what oil, moisture, and water you wish to use, and tie up this instrument; and press just as if you had used a bladder until the moisture reaches the patient's bladeroid.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of stone removal methods and extraction with medicines; we have described the difference between stones caused by rain, and all signs, and which type of stone requires cutting; and for bladder stones, and for penile stones; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stones which are caused by the bladabladder often occur in children and it is a sign that the water of the bladder seems to flow as clear water; and there's an earthy smell, and the male suffers great pain in his penis, and he urinates many times before becoming enlarged; and with such stones, the foundations are greatly affected. It is much easier for children up until they have 4 years old to be cured, it is most severe in older men, and moderate between youths and elderly; and the treatment of those who have large stones is easier than that of those who have small stones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by an enema, in order to expel all filth from the intestines. For it often causes painful irritation.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the hips and stand him up and move to one side, so that his bowels descend to the front of the bladeback, often rising above. Then have him sit between your hands properly positioned, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder slopes downward; then grasp it and touch its ends.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the bowels in that space, then hasten to cut it there. And if they do not come out immediately after touching, anoint your left index finger with oil from your hand and press into the groin of a young patient or your middle finger for an adult patient; and push it downward, grasp the bowel, and when you feel it on your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladaster. Then press near your finger, and release at the point where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	The patient instructs the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he extend upwards with his right hand the joints, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the joints in the area where circumcision is made; then he applies the spatula copingly, which forms:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And they make between those who are between the joints and the foundation, not inwards but along the left armpit; and it is right on the stone, and your arms be close to or near the base, and the cutting shall be long enough so that it's wide below and narrow above, according to the amount of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	occasionally press the arm that is at or near the base so it doesn't need work; and know there are parts of the stone where there are angles or edges: if they stick out; and those parts which are smooth like a ribbon, and round, from which the issue is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	For the hernia where there are angles and edges, make the opening larger; and if it does not pass, you must extract with tongs similar to a file at the head, in order to widen the hole so that it doesn't slip away; or place a subtle instrument curved at the top underneath it; and if you cannot manage thusly, enlarge slightly the opening of a pipe, and if the thing slips out, strain with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, first push the largest at the bladder neck, then cut through it, and the smaller ones afterward if there are any others. And if they are very large, you must suture them, making a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes out through where the urethra cannot seal; however, do try hard at milking it out or breaking up with tongs until you can expel by pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon'amoebic dysentery blood, and bandage it up, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water to cool the abscess; then dress the patient on his back and do not loosen the bandage until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the place is greatly filled with oil and water, then treat with diaphoretic ointment and basil ointment until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if an abscess arises in the wound and festering and congealment of blood in the bladder occur, causing urine retention, which is known to flow without force along with the urine: then apply your finger in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause inflammaturms.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then clean the wound of water and dirt and debris, and aid in every way you can until healed; and it is necessary that all bandages used to dress him have his two thighs bound together, and apply ointments at the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	If the stone is small and it is located along the path of the vein, buried deep within, and urine cannot pass; thus treat as I have described beforehand by dilating many times with this method for relief from straining during treatment. This has been proven to me.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this shape and be at three pointed ends sharpened into one tip.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and wrap it around the vein below the stone: so that it cannot reach back to the bladastery; then insert the rod into the vein gently until it reaches the stone. Turn the rod slowly in your hand near the stone, bit by bit, as much as you can pierce through the stone on the other side; soon the urine will come out, and press your hand against what is left of the stone that remains inside the vein. It will be quickly broken, jumping with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you are unable to do so due to any obstacle, then take a filament from under the pierced area and another above it, make the rod at the place of the piercing between the two ligatures, then extract the impaled object, remove the ligature, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	Of women's pierced areas.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often, piercing occurs in women's bodies, and if it does so infrequently, then the treatment is difficult for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and secondly, there may not be found a well-informed woman who will expose herself at the bathhouse, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is such that sometimes you cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone from the man, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear associated with it.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to do so, one must choose a skilled midwife and inform them at once, and if you cannot find such a wise woman, then no less than a highly subtle doctor; this presents an experienced and knowledgeable female in women's health or a woman who knows part of the art, and he commands that she carry out what you command regarding the investigation of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and carefully observe if the woman is a virgin; then she must place her hand or foot and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain it out from under its place, and recommend that she put her hand or her left hand on the vagina firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If it is dislocated, one must move it gradually from the area near the bladder to above, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then place a wedge at the abscess in the thigh against the inner knee where it becomes misaligned, feeling the abscess in that part; and do not move its joint over or under the abscess, and support it with a splint on the first small movement.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then apply the blade along the thigh; if you feel the abscess, cut until the abscess can be removed forcefully, and know that there are many kinds of abscesses: they come in various sizes (small and large), shapes (sharp and blunt), lengths (long and round), some with heads. Understand these varieties to determine their nature.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the vein does not yield, then apply warm alum paste, and wait for an hour until it is cooled; then return to your work, until the abscess is strong enough, and have dressings that I told you in the removal of abscesses at home to help you with your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the blood does not stop flowing, and it is from an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder at the site and strain with tapes and bandages, and do not start again on this one, and leave the wound alone unless the patient dies; then treat the injury.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the joint rests, return to your work as long as the wound is strong.
de hernie carnouse	Regarding abdominal hernias.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Immediately after washing, it is nothing but a gathering of moisture or pus beneath the skin near the joints, which is contained within the vein; and it is called "pus," and never properly in the tissue of the vein, as one might think it to be another vein; and it is the leather-like substance between the white pus that we have mentioned earlier; and this does not happen at all.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of this gathering is due to weakness in the joints, and that material is spread there.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it never comes from impact on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowish hue, or colorless without redness, or black, or white like water, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	These are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is as we have described, white and faceless, then the boils are like short horns, and they do not open up because there is moisture all around them.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	If it has moisture in the proper skin, then there are boils like part of an ox, and for this reason one thinks they are another horn.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If the moisture is between the skin of the horns and the white face, then it feels quite well; thus when you see to know the color of the moisture, try all around the entire region, so that the form can be seen as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intervention, judge according to what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be made whole to the extent possible and their body replenished; then let them lie on their back, with something slightly elevated underneath, and place many cloths beneath them.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then let them lie on their left side, and command the assistant to sit to their right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the kidneys;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	s.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the sac clean of water to one large opening and drain all the water, and then apply bandages, and raise the back upwards; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the sac; carefully cut along or in pieces evenly his thin bones, so that if you do not cut them skillfully, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the skin bursts during your work, when you have completed the task of the sac, then join the two parts of the ribcage with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the sac affected by another illness, it is necessary to tie up the veins that are hanging loosely, suspecting blood leakage; then cut through the ribcage completely and remove the sac, and treat it as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	Et lorsque elle est réunie en deux parties ensemble, reconnaissez que ce sont deux branches; coupez l'autre partie de même manière que vous avez coupé la première, puis évacuez le sang et applique un linge trempé dans de l'huile sur la plaie.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and apply another clean linen soaked in wine and oil, then place it on the two parts, cover with doubled cloths, and tie securely according to this method.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two more cloths and stuff them with linen rags in this manner and sew them together along the waistline of the trousers; one head is stitched to the base up to the back, and the other to the inner elbow; then both heads are tied on each side under the armpit.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	Once medicine of this kind for a fire cautery in place of iron sawing, and you take a delicate cauterizing knife, cover the leather on the hooves, and heat it as we have said, so that the white sap contained within the water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this method and pierce the white sap at the knots, and the scraping with this delicate hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cover it in all ways that you can scrape off, until everything is removed; and ensure the flame does not touch the skin; and know that this work is more healing; and maintaining proper blood flow, and being mindful of saw cuts.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	If any other condition arises that causes an abscess or bleeding or something else, treat the condition causing it as previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this treatment due to its severity, make a puncture as I have instructed you, and ensure that once you are well assured by the meanings we have mentioned, you proceed accordingly.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If the patient lies on a raised seat with his legs elevated; then puncture the abscess below all the surrounding tissue and place the incision lengthwise across the entire breadth of the body; and let it be wide enough so that all the liquid flows out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton at the location, bind it, and let the remainder of the water drain off; then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the dressing does not allow water to drain out of the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a straw or the tool used for draining in hydrocele cases, as mentioned before; and slightly enlarge the wound so that the fluid returns, and heals after 3-4 months or so. When it has healed as described above, this will pass and the patient's days will be relieved.
de l’aposteme des coions	Regarding abscesses in joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	In this part of the treatise on fears lie various arrangements, for it seems to me that what should be moved is left.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Thus, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the thighs; and this happens quite often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	Juda:e le tile. TTP� on la j'stane; if c the c the body with s ; they to remove by which:
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	The color of the abscess follows the color of the body; it does not cause pain, and is a serious abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it may be a frightening and painful abscess with a fearsome color, without any veins or blood vessels coming from us.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is caused by our arteries, it is recognized by the hot appearance of the abscess when you press against your elbebows.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	they he (1, or: Lord.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	He who is affected by blood inflammation is recognized by his tendency to express pain upon touching the joints.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can properly perform incision on this swelling, and on other chilblains;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and that you cut the core of the cords, then raise the wound upward, and treat the threaded part with white ointment, and free the sutures from all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	de la JJLit on the bon lese 30s;t and they do (do: but.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If it is an artery or that which lies within the vessels, you must release it completely and roundly cover it with a cup.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birthmark is behind or in place, it must be covered entirely and remove the wool as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	, and it the is rense avoir that you to cest l'orent li nt the tissage. And heuist la veill; car covient the beau coure est de, et as tu avie eont lesse est paris s’aveug, se vntet and lea les doth esprove not come cite le rengin luex et est ongli.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an encapsulated abscess surrounded by a wrapping similar to that of a lump, with the softening of boils.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and it moves quickly in patients when it occurs;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	The treatment of this disease is as much dreaded as the one described before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And indeed we will tell of its use, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary for you to have the patient sit on a raised seat, then use a sling to support their arms over your shoulders.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	Apply this treatment to all vessels near the genitals and thighs, extending them fully by the master's hand.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then apply a sharp cauterizing instrument across the area of veins broadly, ensuring they are exposed completely.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	it e/her: does not too tot:
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle where it has come to a point with a double thread and tie it at the first spot where you saw blood flowing, then securely fasten it to the opposite end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then wrap around with a bandage tightly according to the body's length, and treat any corrupted sores.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as you would with others or use a poultice, ensuring that neither of the limbs are restricted.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	the same le plus is plek force (et t c:sont the ou i; bon.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the bone loses its nourishment due to incision of veins, they become dry and cannot be healed.
de la routure dou syfac	Of sore festering
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The treatment of this branch is by incision where festering occurs or extension under the belly in the area of the arms, because the intestines descend from that swelling to one side.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	by thema the le corps are not so ; 31 pneo, and t. Mckus that m.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	When the signs of a swollen vein occur, it happens little by little over long periods and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it is the same for boils that reach to the forehead because the intestine rushes forward.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	When it comes to the signs of gangrenous sack severance, as sudden pain occurs at its onset and various abscesses appear near the skin surface, due to intestinal issue and gangrene in the body.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And at no time do they pass with the intestines, and are retained inside, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these cases of iron treatment by fear, it is necessary to remove them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	The manner of the treatment is such that you command the patient to reset the intestines into its place within the wound, if it can be pushed back in.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then place soothing substances on its neck between your hands, and lift the limbs gently.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then extend the head upward and bandage all of the shafts of the thighs long.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert into the waist ligaments with hooks according to what you need for opening the wound, and be those that the bones can emerge from.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the sinew that is above the skin of the cords, as long as the white sinew remains uncovered on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then insert your finger into the cord that is slack, between the white sinew which is above the skin of the head, and between the second sinew.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And separate the part that is behind the head, and between the second sinew; then move your right hand inside the core of the cords, extend the white sinew upwards with your left hand, and lift the head along all the sinews towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister to extend the mouth upwards, and remove what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if there is any intestine wrapped or white and hard sack found, and if you find anything, blow into the abdinal cavity.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine strands, and insert it into the rear part near the sacrum, which is after the calf's skin; behind the tailbone, then tie off the veins that appear in strings until there are four strings.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape and bind the sacrum, which we have said is below the calf's skin, with a strong knot using two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the strings around the veins and tie them with two parts so that none of the pus can escape except through the abscess.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And apply the bandage according to the first lengthy joint, and after these two joints leave out the sack which is below the main knuckle of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then for the rest according to the roundness that the joint carries; then cut into the part which is below the skin of the knuckle, as evenly and symmetrically as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then prepare rough wool in oil, and apply it to the wounds, and also place the bandage that we mentioned earlier.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to fear of blood flowing out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens and leave the bandage on until it is soaked through; and if it stays wet for too long, then remove with hot water as we have said.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound further to ensure it heals perfectly clean.
de hernie carnouse	line:
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this treatment, I have never seen anyone who dared to undertake the remedy with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made as if the treatment pieces are assembled like screws, in such a way that you bind the threads after sawing slightly above and below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bandage with me and treat the abscess of what works therein until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Never comes purging in anger, as we have said, and opens the eyes; and do not let any of the bowels come out at the corners, and if they do, it is little, and all returns within hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in any case, if it lingers too long at this point, a wound or pus forms until the bowels are emptied.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this occurs due to the extension of the sinew which is in the arm, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and filled with blood vessels.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and treatment is through caustic means, as we have previously mentioned; and never in this manner is it treated with iron.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	by the cest et ce discret in le due to them: we and heal est le iste istreat done este de cesme this les, as s’en. Into the ici èsner, but d’est li de fuit en lits est ne la terre avec les maint, que lesd et celet;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the sinew that is beneath the skin where it protrudes, then take the thread and tie it over the visible sinew.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press at the front of the belly, then cut out the two ends of the sinew near the head of the thread, and tie both together.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the thread head, and do not cover or extend anything else but sinew as I have instructed you in the treatment of the rectum's intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	; k by Hre some;
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is swollen, has no appearance in the normal position, and the cautery moves easily at this spot, closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	For softening of the thick skin of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the joints is softened in certain individuals because their bursae are moisturized and appear transparent; when curing it, you must lay the patient on his back with the affected area exposed, and cut the overlying loose skin from its natural skin, then sew the two lips together along a single line or four lines firmly; between these stitches, treat as you would other wounds until they are healed, and extract any pus.
dou chastrement	By means of cauterization
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	By means of cauterization, I say that cauterizations are described in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. However, they are necessary for two reasons: one, so the physician can respond when asked about their treatment; and another, because we often need to cauterize certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and other beasts. Thus, I say that cauterization is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method where we do it by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its hoovamoisture softens and becomes pliable; then grip with your hand, making sure not to feel any tension when you release. For cauterization of a wart: one must grasp the skin around the wart with their left hand, then apply a suspending agent, and cauterize each point thoroughly. Leave no small spot or delicate veins that are on its surface; this method is similar to attraction as sometimes nothing remains afterward at the incision site, which may cause the animal discomfort leading it to desire release, so treat the wound until it heals completely.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites: Those are individuals who possess both male and female sexual organs or characteristics, often seen as a medical anomaly in old texts. The translation should address this directly while maintaining sensitivity to modern understandings of gender diversity. Here is the line-by-line English translation for clarity:
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	There are two ways in men: one where between the two testicles it is shaped just as a woman's nature, with hair and sometimes even urination; and the other way among women, having on its foreskin like a penis and two testicles. The treatment of men and women is that you treat all swellings together, and care for them as other wounds; in the second manner, those from whom the urine leaks through the skin of the testicles have no cure.
de la tentigene	Of tendentiousness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tendentiousness is a swelling on the natural part, so unpleasant to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment. It should be that you trim the excess of tendentiousness on your hand or elbows, gently clipping them off; and do not cut too deep, lest bleeding occurs, then heal with other treatments until it's healthy again; and another swelling at the mouth of the gall bladcuh, and its exit point, and possibly leaks severely, and is like a cleft. Thus they called the ancient "disease kowee." It must be clipped as we have said with tendentiousness, and heal until it's healthy again.
de erratique	Of erraticness
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic if it is the nature of women not to be conceived, or if the genitalia are small; and it is innate by birth, or due to illness that arises therein; or it's because of a close union, or subtle lechery or espionage, and it happens throughout the entire body, or in limbs, or elsewhere; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly offspring. The knowledge of this condition is by observation of the bile. If discharge occurs frequently, whether at both testicles or penis. If it's from a subtle lechery, and there are two pus-filled lesions, act quickly and do as follows: have the patient lie on their back with legs spread apart; then place the two fingers together firmly over the discharge area until all infection is cleared; afterwards apply wool or lint soaked in oil to the area daily until it heals. And if the lechery is hardened and deeply ingrained, you must scrape away the tainted skin resembling a holly leaf. If discharge results from heat, suspend it above an onion and cut off; then apply medicinal ointments such as dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of frankincense; next dress the wound with a wide gauze bandage so that it cannot close; then continue treatment in this manner for an extended period. Finally, prepare a linen tent to cover the area until healed. And when heat occurs throughout the body, follow these steps unless there are festering sores present. For on festering and inflamed sores in the groin, do not touch them directly.
des emorroides	Inflamed if it is swelling or inflammation within the genital area: Do Not to be touched directly; follow these steps for treatment as long as there are festering wounds.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without customary conditioning, and when hemorrhoids become old they turn into ulcers; and we have already discussed in the division their appearances, signs, and symptoms, and I will now say those which receive cure. One should say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are fully exposed within the anus, cannot be felt except by iron treatment. Those that can be felt at the mouth of the anus may be treated. Therefore it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then extend the ulcer with forceps, remove its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood such as dragon's blood and incense, among similar things; after that apply bandages around the area for an hour, then place her in cold water. If bleeding occurs there, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegnate peel and gall nuts along with other substances; then give her wheat flour mixed with honey and almond oil, and make it into a plaster on her back. And if it stings (hurts), that is good. If not, apply blisters to the back and thighs without iron, then take lamb's wool soaked in plantain or aglentier juice with wine vinegar, and apply it there. And when the abscess rests, treat the area with ointment until it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" turns red, and feels rough like a head, so cover (treat) as I have described the ulcer; then cure until it becomes health
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many ways of abscesses come in the thighs, such as chancre and pierous abscess, herpes, itching disepertions and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, along with many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, I must say about this treatise on the hot abscess which comes in the thighs, which is not among those that harden; and if you want to learn about the work of iron, observe whether the abscess is swollen and red at its beginning, accompanied by heat and fever. Then do not rush to puncture it, but allow the pain to be soothed as long as possible; then make the patient sit on a small stool, with two small pillows where he can rest his head, and place him with his back straight and bring together the parts of the limb that are away from the leg; let his thighs be spread apart, and put your arms under his hips, firmly binding them with good linen. Then direct the instrument toward the right side ribcage, and prepare the tool used for working inside the mouth of the abscess, after which comes its form; it is necessary that when you see this tool ready, insert a probe into it to determine how deep the abscess cavity goes so that nothing from the instrument enters more deeply than it should without causing discomfort to the patient; if the swelling is larger, cover the depth of the abscess with a cloth so that the swelling does not cause pain. And place the horn of the tool above it; and moisten the instrument.
de l’enfantement	When childbirth occurs: observe whether it is a normal delivery or difficult; provide comfort and assistance to the mother during labor; ensure cleanlinees tools and surroundings for safety of both mother and baby; assist with breathing techniques, position changes, and pain relief as needed. After birth, support the mother in bonding with her newborn, initiate breastfeeding if possible, and monitor their health closely.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Firstly, it is necessary for the midwife to know the natural figure of childbirth and signs when she sees a woman in labor, desiring to smell her urine; then quickly proceed with delivering the baby; thus you can tell that these births follow the natural figure, and there is an issue at its head, with the second coming along with it; and when you see these signs, gently press on her belly so the child comes out soon; for as long as they descend towards their head, the second one follows, and waste matter in their excesses are easily expelled by proper cleanliness; and those who come otherwise do not arrive naturally. For sometimes it comes upon its feet, or to the body or shoulders, or hands, when coming out of her belly or bottom, or even turned perhaps around her neck, and other malicious figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out through its head naturally, and the mother is laboring intensely, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool or women hold her; and bring forth from nature's ointment or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then place between the midwife's thumbs the small spatulous substance in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	:t: the quisst:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the dislocation of a child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When a child comes onto their feet, they must be lifted up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then gently turn them little by little until they are level.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	the pies sus, and not to a vile:
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it reaches as far down to the buttocks, then he instructs to press, and there is choking from congestion.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it goes further, if God wills so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, if it turns a little and a little more, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	heu's. Morgueil ougt they are not enst;
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, take masticated wax, and oil of sesame, and molten resin, and all ground in a single mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	And apply this oil inside and out of the woman's body with it.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then hold it at rest until its bones and joints.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	When it is softened from being dislocated, then apply a leech bandage and reset it back in place, leaving it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make the patient sit on a stool, then induce sneezing and strain his mouth and nose, and press his belly lightly, as now he is vomiting.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From an issue with the child's knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When a child comes to this state, put your hands on them gently but firmly.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then support their neck and let the feet hang downward, and lay them on any bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And then gently bend their hands and then press the hands onto the belly, and remove any pillows underneath, until they are completely downward.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	the c (the ou:lign farn’t; s lait de les que il.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	Et gently lift it little by little; and command the woman to hold tight until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the dislocation of a child coming out wide with one hand extended during delivery.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I require designing to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if heal iste:
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If it cannot move, then make her lie on a bed with her legs straightened out.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then attend to the swelling that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then study how to restore the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And so that they can; Do nott; cannot be aumie en sonde the t (not le et de ait the et e ne leg 1 ce; and sesse est unt, and heum:l; if youg fe as f ire dit lesse que la pe c.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of dislocation of the child on its neck, with hands spread apart, and face turned towards the mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	Then you should instruct the bailiff to wash his hand, then gently turn it little by little and wrap lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equalized, if you apply the softening herb and oil as we have said, then command that they move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, make it sit on a chair, and command that she sighs; then let her snort.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for the entire second procedure
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this way to all the second procedure, you must dress the splint on your finger, until the moisture is dried out;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then insert the child inside, as long as you have put them correctly, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then, if slightly moved.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the outcome of bones.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	(prent that them so quist theye; that the de les t not s covette cite the:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and they do not live, if given no name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this: that they multiply greatly, and are driven away by the syphilis which causes them, connected to swelling.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and no time do they come out naturally like normal wounds, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	the iniquere de n’s ; and m so t. Tum se thouging s thate et l’t un (btresse: if you know they son les que la nde byttir, et prits le no ils ne faire of s a.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And make thus as it proves beneficial to move for health.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Of more than five times formed in the measurement of child, and are made up to twelve, and all the same.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it is necessary for the barber to know everything, as sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	And do according to what it requires.
de l’enfant mort	le parti clow.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman with a dead child or womb as I have described in the section, and there is no labor, and you are forced to proceed by hand.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is necessary that you ascertain whether the woman is of sound health and has no injury or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is required that the woman be supine on her back with her head tilted down and legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	et the minister tears off two parts, or whichever is attached to the bed so that it may not be treated with the child'hemorrhoids.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the hemorrhoids with a mixture of oil from almonds and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and this musk.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then gently bind it up with hemorrhoids; then ensure that they are tied down in place at the site of occurrence.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take care if a child is too large to descend below its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you place the onions in its eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or from the beard or cheek or near the groin.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And dislocation is upon, if the bandages or beside them or in the back or behind or forehead to the eaument d'on and near the ears. Or on the side of it or forehead before the cheek or for ache or behind with after the lice or at the mouth;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is proper that you tie the sling to his right hand and place the support between his thumbs of the left hand, and push gently with the whole hand until he reaches the vacant position we have mentioned.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the sling:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then attach to another sling, or whichever you have at hand, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend evenly by moving from one side and the other so they may move outward, and be provided with bone pins to hold them in place, as shown by their shape.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, where the patient may join any of its two oil joints and insert it into that part, while treating the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there are none left, place this pin or another one higher up and do so until it protrudes all the way through.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	le est and; (or, a certain, such as p;mz, s, then, so tizz that thounds if they Md;
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If it is necessary, wrap around a cloth so that it covers entirely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then bind the wound on the plantar joint or ankle and thus it is necessary to do so in the other hand as well, using two fingers.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	When the head of a child is large and difficult to deliver during birth, or if it has an abnormal presentation with its forehead positioned first.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it becomes necessary, you should insert the spatulum between your two fingers and gently guide out the head and amniotic fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you use the instrument called 'almidach', from which it is formed with instruments or chapsticks that come afterwards. (Note: This translation may not be entirely accurate as "almidach" and its usage are unclear in this context.)
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	s by m tounceobust it's, the ORLus marquer contte ; (O;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	And then treat with tongs for pulling bones;
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the head jumps up again and is forcibly held in place, it should be split until the moisture that caused the dislocation has been released.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, cut into pieces as you are able to move them.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swolebed in the abdomen or below the ribs, you must pierce until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, then there is slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the marrow is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if he is strained in the belly or udder, it suits that you stretch with a cloth wrapped around his hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	so be and for not at est to ready they de l’mie: ici e and the bles as is.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	If another limb is affected by bone disease, and the shoulder remains dislocated.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If you pinch his thumb at the base of the hairline, and pull it up to the root of the hair.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	nd, it m s s a bentre la; c that:s; t (et ne :Ct les they must be said u; do not d the same l’sis.that is the bo: 5. If you can have in Latin and ous lines.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	If the mouth of the muscle is retracted due to an abscess that has arisen there, do not attempt any treatment.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Rather it requires applying moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the treatment includes placing plasters, as well as softening with water and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	the t ous: 4t sofende as he la ou m. If yous de nus that gill est qu�z.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one cannot manage it, let the bone be cut into pieces, leaving nothing of the periosteum.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And once you have done as we have explained above, let them come to the wound is made as described by us.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	When changes of blood occur, let it be placed in a tight strain, and apply other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with twins inside her womb; one was dead and the other alive, which she cut loose.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	cail as it: MID and noit. If yout theme Middle.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and pondered for a long time, unable to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong attraction forceps, and extracted one bone initially, followed by others after some days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly concerned because the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	dont est the in; do not too that gaspits ou les s.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I cleanse the wound, and train hands to hold an object, until they reach a better point.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And after a long time so, it settled back to its place for a while.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have found this chapter useful because when the master encounters something strange, he knows how to assist it effectively.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Double resetting of dislocations back to their place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here follows the form of the pressure point, where one finds the books; and at two corners there are two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	line. If you s c’mstur; the are a:
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let the mouth of the club be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees one inch, and long half a palm.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two joints there should be two adjustments of this same club, which are firm in both, half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two adjustments are bent into the mouth of the club to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	line tre font:Saint marits tignement on t antre ce tr*t; and c
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And it is of two heads and two dislocations, as you see, one palm in length, and two hands wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the entire instrument opened, make the woman sit on one bed with her feet propped up and legs elevated,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	the li poil s.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work with your hand on the entire instrument, as you did with the pincers equally, according to the amount that opens the mouth of the burrs, until it does what they desire.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all forged alike and of various appearances; and when the masters have prepared them, the work proceeds more swiftly and to greater heights according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not doubt the instrument that you have prepared it, for its needs are by no means excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is held during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to retract her leg, and then exert pressure on the condition, and strain her hands towards the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she falls from this, that's alright.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a jar or pot, and open the lid. Then put in herbs that can open the mouth of the childbirth passage such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, chicory, and fenugreek.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or any of them, boiled in water over the fire; then put a spout or funnel into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the cauldron.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it stew until the vapors enter the cauldron; then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If there is a relapse of the swelling.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	the t. (fint tounce that s, and by;
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	When you wish to perform the secondary reset; and once it has been located, grip and extend it gradually straight, so that the muscles do not contract during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But move it slightly to the right and left, and then turn it; it will come back into place and dislocate again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the edge of the muscle is torn or stretched, we have said to treat by inducing sneezing, and smoking herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	f: bones the resont the ar zhe : ous (tard par la liza mermis belle. The right ou byzbui and.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the testicles be tied to the thighs of the woman, then enema with medicinal oil by four-fold pharmacist.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it swells and returns, it will come back stronger; however, when it does so, if foul smell comes to the stomach and head, it causes nausea in the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If necessary then smoke-baths with cloves for this: none of the old have tried smoke-bathing with sorrel and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fans the woman for holding back the flowering and secondary growth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it appears similar to a vase, placing its pointed head in a recessed area with the eyes wide above the flame.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and there are fumigations over the coals until they are spent, then another begins anew.
de percier lou fondement	c so that lesse que la ou not le t;
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the proper foundation of wisdom, but rather it is hollowed out by subtle deceits.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to pierce that deceit at its root and not just scrape off the surface scum, and take care that he does not touch the sore.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil to it, then apply an ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	by  fairet s the a bo: MRIse bonign tant that son les line; and c’s il ac fu: Then they may be ma;
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	At no time does this swelling from the suturing of a wound or abscess occur; one must dress that suture as needed: follow our guidance on using linen bandages.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula at its base.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that originate from below the foundation are swollen and grow larger than those near the base or within two parts of space,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is an abscess or more; and if that swelling is old, treat it, and use a particular kind of moisture like fine powder or subtle ointment.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these abscesses are not often present; and they are known by what comes out of it or evacuation when the patient experiences vomiting, and sometimes with feverish symptoms.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are abscesses that extend up to the bladder, and towards the middle of the penis; they reach the hip joint, and down near our genital area.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one finds a persistent pus flow at the foundation, not mere pus.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	Et c'est que tu enfonces ton doigt index ou pouce, et mets une aiguille subtile d'acier ou de fer dans le furoncle quand il n'y a pas de torsion.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	Eсли есть изгиб, то он вводит нежное пластиковое кольцо или, например, лошадиную шерсть, пока чувствуется ремешок или волос на вашем пальце.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	и если вы не почувствовали его, и он не причинил изжоги или вздутия, как мы сказали ранее.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Make sure it does not pierce at all; if you are too hasty, do not use a curette.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass through and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced near the hip joint, then pus flows towards that area.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	by.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas there is no strong remedy but painful work, and the folly of foolish men who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is neither persistent nor old, with hope of healing by iron as I have tried.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their buttocks, and keep their buttocks angled towards their belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then create a tent of linen or cloth if there is twisting, until you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels discomfort in the lower region, it's necessary that you insert your index finger there,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If you do not reset it properly, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	In any case where proper treatment can be administered effectively, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is given should be to carefully apply the fine cautery according to the size of the abscess as previously mentioned.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	the lisit est en; and to de, do not;t that it ise bonte etre they should you may also aremiel. And if you must be m in-fie as heum: That they s n'I don’s ond cide la douzer il’l q hen
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then treat torn tendons with a poultice until they heal, then the treatment of salve soothing and binding them.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus sound, it is well. If not, there cannot be any other soundness.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is tried between them, and does not penetrate to the bone at its base or foundation, and there is placed between your two fingers an ample covering of wax or sycamore wood, and you see the fistula through where the covering darkens.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the end of the fistula is reached at its beginning, and then covered before touching it, apply the cauterization afterwards, until reaching the top of the wound.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	this.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if blood is won, cutting between you and the vein; cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery is effective for two things: that is to say, the hardening of displaced cartilage and the coagulation of blood and removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the cleansing of dirty bandages with butter or ground oats, until they become damp, and thereafter let the cartilage heal in the bow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	s; t: ça mardroit.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near to the very foundation, and is distant from the body, you may touch your thumb or wrist, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tenting (swelling), and between two are the sheath or shaft or glans, or it is near to be cut, if there is no sign of certainty but only faith and hope, through the ministrations of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	line J. And s they n’re a
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	Do not go too far with it, that you do not cover the support holding the foundation, and let evacuations come through as nature allows.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if you become clean, or remove the covering and clean it after being covered near the foundation, or by means of a tool prepared for this purpose;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then mendicant the flaw which is within the wound, as much as you see.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study to heal the wound and maintain the fistula in the part behind the foundation; if it were an easier task for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And never are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it lies close to the foundation near the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	the former est not
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it inserts a twisted thread of two, and wraps the dressing around all the thread into the abscess until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If [the arrowhead] is stuck at the edge of its base shaft, then draw out the thread from that pierced one and tie your needle or shaft.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the thread from its head, and join the two heads together, holding them tightly, and leave it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	t.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is stitched up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, make it pierced in every way that you can, if it is not too hard.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For do not attempt to pierce the abscess if it is too firm, and then heal it as we have said until it becomes healthy again.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatulum for making an abscess is very sharp and one-sided, cutting.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	On one hand not, for this is what cannot be coped with as should not be done, as you see here.
des emorroydes	To treat swollen glands, the following methods are used which we now explain to you; but do not forget what you heard before about various techniques of fire cautery.
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	In many ways: some are within the foundation like tree sap, and there are small ones as well as large ones, and in it blood is contained.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there are one or more, they erode the foundation as well as the top of the foundation; however, those that erode have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and therein lies some yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the body's color.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	the bo-bla.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If it is quick, and you pinch with pliers or your fingernail, then catch the root of its tendons.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the nails cannot hold due to their moisture, they are taken with thread or cotton or a piece of chamois leather.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull out the splinters with your fingers, then bind them, and dust on hot powders that are in place of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	the final; 2t m.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	If the foundation cannot come out, then enemas the patient with stinging and harsh cleansers to wash what lies at its base, so it may exit openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If a malady persists, and the thread is very close to the foundation, then the treatment should be light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And that you grip them with your fingernails or pliers, and cut the edges, then treat as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear iron incisions.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	the 3; the se ; < kor tous; by it is n'sirel’s est en tist; or un:
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is too wide; and straighten the thread firmly, then trim the thread, and extract the needle, and do so for all others, leaving a bit to drain excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place upon the foundation a gauze soaked in rose oil or wax, and put on the bandage, instructing the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it remain until it heals, and when they are cured, apply ointment and other remedies until it is healthy again.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Doubly firmly and solidly at its foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it often becomes firm in the intestines and through natural constriction, especially when the disease is old and medicines do not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary to remove the skin from a gangrenous spot or fingernail above, which does not allow for moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	de lik and se cumand the issue they so far, and heal et ould that m. And if you must be a quant elles, but also:
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	If it cannot heal, resume the scraping more forcefully than before until it is sufficiently raw and be singed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it becomes healthy again.
dou fremit	And the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A mouse is a small creature with feet placed before the body, and it goes very often.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and it is not caused by coldness; one feels it just like a tremor and spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is to take a feather from a goose's wing or a large crow'n feather and place that on the tremor until it covers all around the red circle.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around to encircle the entire tremor and grasp it firmly, and extract its roots from their source.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this tremor as a spider or iron of this form, and be subtle from below and crosswise above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not feel it, but keep hold of both [sides], and squeeze them; and if you see the tremor, then causticate it as before or with a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	loin.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At no time is an enema made of silver or copper, or melted lead or metal wax; and at no time are any of these small and large suppositories administerebit according to those it is given to.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Thus, what is administered in the treatment of children who are weak and painsome are small [suppositories].
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enemas is as follows when broadly applied or if the belly is bound according to this manner: [translation continues with detailed instructions on how the clistere (enema) is administered, but specific details are not provided in this excerpt].
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	And it has a distension where the belly is twisted, as you see, and the head pierced inside; and have two holes on one side, and on the other side one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And it is that the belly or the stomach holds the remedies of a bladder from an animal or parchment paper, and be pierced entirely through both holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And between each hole, there is a gap, then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted wire for half or more around it, and stitch the belly as if it were an uterus.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	When the medication is within, take it out with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then enema; and this is the circular form.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and apply it to the head of the enema with oil, butter, or similar substance, then pour in gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the minister holds the enema with both hands until it is fully emptied, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to the chest.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	t, she; The Sce;
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer the enema when the patient is suffering from a bowel issue, and the medication quickly leaves, it may recur until they are well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if hemorrhoids are present at their foundation or abscess, the enema should be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	This is the form of the subtle suppository through which the tube must be restrained:
des plaies	Wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	As we have said in the section on wound care, now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion:
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and where they are located, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made include piercing of stones, cutting with spears and knives, or from lances or clubs or arrows, or similar objects.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	according to the places on the body where they occur, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	;
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from a stone strike or similar causes, for the skin is wholly torn and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and if you slightly suspect an abscess of great heat: quickly clean the head area itself if there is blood from the wound, and place a bandage opposite to the affected part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid giving the patient an excess of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not wish to fasten himself, his flesh should be thinned out, and he should not drink wine or partake of meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place it on the wound, if an abscess comes there, apply a well-milled cloth soaked in oil or with a steeped wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no abscess, then apply it to the wound, if it is fresh and all its blood has not dried out, and it's not moved by air or dust, here's some powder that I will say about later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	seslgris by cxob;
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's grip and similar, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, then join them by suturing, just as I will describe for abdomnent injuries, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone and swollen, and holds only slightly, then bind it; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hardened skin in place of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And commands the patient to eat large meats as if cooked grains and fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find pus or rot without touching the bone, cover it completely and pour hot water on it, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if the artery is in the wound or vein without a cord and cannot be tied with medicine, cut it off as needed; and if you find dislocation, tie it up with thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If this does not benefit them at all, then you shall burn it with a hot iron.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; it is that you place this powder which has been mixed with mercury (arsenic).
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of preparing the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts blood from a male lamb or doe. Three parts live copper and fine the powder thoroughly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And clean the wound, and strain firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then bind well and allow to heal freely if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healthy again.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	t les mare;
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	If the arrow has moved the wound, especially if it is still there, do not put any of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but place on some digested ointments or crushed wheat flour made with water and honey, until it forms a paste.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	that you of disaster the pies iste de lignées en choflors: anne les draper sonde ici avec flour with honey, they to dry bone and sus ce oint. That d on eau a farme d'soun le soe, though heu, butt;
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	When a bone fracture occurs with the wound, if it is small, extract with fine forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about this after head fractures.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound to the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes or in the neck and it is simple, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or arteries of the neck are severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	by the de the in the pain and igne:
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the veins is cold, and their continuation with the brain is high.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but the medicine must be boiled as in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, then cooked similarly in gentle water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	the tissants bone can't I would not the distance; and igne be it. Let it.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind and bandage it, then treat until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce or cut below them.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the vein is swoln, and blood flow occurs, open it, bind it, and cauterize as needed.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	they. s.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If it comes out through the bone of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then let it heal naturally without any movement, then treat with poultices until it is well again.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has affected the bone, you must attend to it accordingly.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	by; 1. If so e-cur theyre Jn: they must be noit; theta on line: b:ll that d. They shouldnts or and if a: s; do not le m t but n’t for the same.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let it be dissevered and aligned properly;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply powder upon the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone and a sinus in the wound, treat it as I described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	t;t:s.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then examine whether the patient shows signs of shock before they fall unconscious: understand that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	If it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood intact, do not apply the powder in the first hour nor bind it so that no blood flows out.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and let him vomit, and give water to the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you do not have ointment, place a piece of clean cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or longer.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	lfount witht la;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the proper alignment of the bones, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat with tent-like dressings and other remedies until it is safe.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal and worsens, then know there is an abscess; treat as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	to the t:
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, with stitches; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in the bone, and parts need to be removed, so treat the wound and pull out the splinters if necessary.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if not needed, let the wound heal by scabbing over, to facilitate the extraction process.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have stated.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Doubtless rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The disruptions of the belly are great, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From such a large wound, neither the intestines nor their nerves are affected, hence no infection occurs within.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And suturing is easier, and never worse than a small wound compared to a large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Therefore when resetting it multiple times, if not done gradually, the intestines are moved in.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	For this reason, the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, causing them to move more easily.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and so the membrane wound is moved, causing the intestines to be relocated to their place among the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the treatment of an abdominal wound is by four means:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common suturing methods occur in abdominal wounds:
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	contes.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And anyway they are more properly with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there's nothing from the intestines out.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and generally it can be done by one of these two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	heal; c, et s that f in the skin soignant (1 said rumpard est par mar.
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because the intestines are swoln by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cool, soothe it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with warm water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	s that heal:
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And when the intestines swell, they are pierced until emptied.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and it has never been done with constipation before, and it is necessary to empty in order to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling subside, if the intestines are cooked soft or tough and of poor quality,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	ond.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	If it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used to treat bunions.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	The first treatment is pulling that which is twisted.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	That none should cut without great necessity or need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the swelling to split open:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If the mass enters into the hollow area without being expelled, and you see its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If reset according to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If possible, for this is movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and located in the part below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	If it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raises its legs higher than its head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	And if it is in the part near the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If you place the head and buttocks higher than below parts,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And similarly if the protrusion of the belly is in one of the two parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	Then make sure that the affected side is raised higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus one must treat as I describe for large wounds and those of medium size.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	And for small wounds, use what has been prescribed.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then you shall have between your hands. A minister of pity who shaves the entire rut into his hand,
et assemble les levres;	And join the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And this is the common method for suturing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave at the head of the wound two spaces apart, and insert an awl where there is a strong thick thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce through the two layers of skin with two points of a bodkin.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is just under the skin, until you have made it completely perforated in that area,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	by
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	First, strain a double thread around both points of the needle.
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then immediately bring together the two edges of the wound.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And then leave a space for two fingers, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	so e s.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	And continue to do so according to what you need with the needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Keep the entire wound tightly bound.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and keep it closely with needles and in place, gouves entaques cauterie, as ours is often, a lons; et li mettiez the incision de bones.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	For fine needles cover the entire wound, while too thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore, they must be of medium size.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and one must not insert needles too far from the wound or into the flesh.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	So they do not cover or affect the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	Then cover the heads of needles so they do not prick and bother the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And place tents or linens at the tips of needles to keep them steady.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And let it heal until the wound is well joined.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	And this manner of stitching with needles is more beneficial in small wounds.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	they be heu que the de that ete le les plaited. Which it done and more place as them doe at a to have dislocation, and their not the l’oeus isnées themt with ormour can make the teeth in such are many. Please give to lais so as onct.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second method is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And it is that you join the two heads of skin with the two edges of the sinew together using a needle, or if there is strong thread available.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have cut through all four joined ends,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the dislocation at the part where you began, using the method of wrapping like cloths.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place space between each stitch as wide as a small finger.
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching should be on the bone,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	byz C'cznaisside p le t, as a dislocation de la uche:
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was afflicted by a knife wound
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than one span wide
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it involved two intestines that were each more than a span in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	the is no it to a pe's nott that donnez
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned his intestines as it had been xiv hours since.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up until xv days, and healed, becoming healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	et did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and placed two layers of linen above the wound once a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	le CARA. Thist on lesse a0 ; Ou are that isnt the in English by anye pe mane  (prisso t:che:
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has perceived the edge straight on, if the head is dislocated by such injury or where you have stuck in the needle.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make a slit from another side to the interior of that which protrudes outward;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the purpose of this suture is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	That he to lisst; EST Sara; that c vuns quill butt; The t the b they it se's. If you not just.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of suture, which Galen refers to properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is such that unites the two parts naturally together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of its face to the other face, in such manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And leaves both shoulders slack;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through to that inside part.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	As to two shoulders slacked.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then perform the percision of both sides down to their innermost parts, in two other shoulders that are opposite each side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And it is therein a method of suturing and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	; If you can  (et bruendroit et's
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one should insert one needle from one side and the other from another in the manner of those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And know that when the rupture is within the abdomen,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	by gue la pe ctura:
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is so when you find the fresh wound fully supplied with blood, thus making its edge moveable.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if return the intestines, and their edges; then apply powder soaking in fat,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And they cut the skin, and let it heal softly, and apply the ointment;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healthy.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicine, then apply something like this immediately when it begins to turn red or swell: wool, old cotton.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move (it) two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need for other medicines in certain conditions when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound is communicating with major limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	lesse;
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And place it between the angles, and under the collars;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	If he feels pain or swelling at the joint, and it often occurs,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if blood in the wine enemas is blackened, and mainly where the swelling comes up to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and piercing into tissues, and stools indicating that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is for the swelling of veins that they are, and for the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the sliver jumps from the wound, it is reset just as the intestines are fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut out what is between the ligaments.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place two pieces of skin hanging from the part above the wound as far downward as possible to facilitate removal when the sinews break, and the wound pouches.
de la routure dou boueil	them: it is f, which cannot be the following them if not the unt;
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are inflamed, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in certain cases,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen a man troubled by an upset stomach from a thrust of a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and was invaded and became a fistula, with discharge and bloating occurring as a result;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I provided treatment according to what was possible, and persisted in delicately removing it until it became clean, and the ulcers healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it join together, I doubted that the patient did not have pain in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm present, but they remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and experimentalists say that when there is a small wound within the intestine, it must be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	by them.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when the flapping is open at the mouth, place it between the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	If its mouth is drawn outwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	And then wrap its head with a cowl, so that it cannot slip off,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then apply another bandage in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed.
et cout la plaie.	And cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If such a head injury occurs into the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And if one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine.
en teil maniere:	And in such manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	s.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	And then wrap at the head of this thread a fine flax twisted cord.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then insert the thread through the needle, and sew with intestines, and stitch in the suturing.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of frantic stitching is not further than according to the way of trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	he; That le.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, or if she may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	He says that any wound or abscess, when it ages, should all be called "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and especially if it is raised and begins to swell.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	as a.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it is as if lifted like a bird's feathers;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And neither ever clear or thick string;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	At no time too much, and at other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I spoke earlier about wound healing in the section on wounds, that any untreated wound will not close and:
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	ougt they aret is de lesfors est so iatro the fertiles;s, and such: too, or; f gue be avert, ouziz: ym not c l'e lait n’s les ne stai; heuze.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This means to say, by smallness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	Or due to its harmfulness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there is hardness underneath the skin and on the lips, do not allow it to grow further;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	by c, for the d (s
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	When the bone is fractured, and the material is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	when the medication is not good for the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because the decay is like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or due to its property in the area is late digestion, and delayed health, and flees by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	As for therae arry it is, let not be; ought the tirage of lest he can doith no lesse; or you see these signes, ewes oste that thou seetis sighte.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Saying that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	When there are fistulas coming from major veins, and arteries, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or to the sac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs.
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	thet that they don’t he.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	All boils of this kind are of difficult healing, with only effort and ignorance involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	If there is no boil that reaches the location I have described and you are confident in its healing,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you observe it, then take a tent of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight, so choose one.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	And if the fistula is crooked, seek an exceedingly fine tent-pole of wood,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	For the pole bends easily along the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	And if there are abscesses on hands with holes that cannot be well searched by probing.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	If the abscess is cleansed through one of the openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture may move from one opening to another, and cleanse it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	by them or:
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	And ask the patient to indicate well where they feel pain upon pressure of your hand, and its location.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you truly know the location where it is, and if it's far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the locations that I have told you, if the condition according to what I have said,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	s.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the abscess is well deepened in the right place, then it must be cut cleanly from the front as much as possible.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then apply bandages with medicinal vinegar, and tie up to the top of the abscess,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	the same de la it OX faills.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then apply healing balms to the joint continuously until it is restored.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it is not secured by this method, then cauterize as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is decayed from the abscess, then cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves affect limbs or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	If the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, until the kingship is fully restored.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with remedies for various conditions until it becomes healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if it is not healthy, return the arrow as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	Approach so that you do not go past the fountain:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it reveals itself and appears as soon as you reach the bottom.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all decay, then return to its original place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	by: they dont the text de there.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not so, know that the decay is too great, you cannot go there.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other method than the healer's natural skill.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with tongs.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If the arrow is with a suitable instrument,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, then break them all, leaving none intact.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture causes discomfort, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	like yout.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	If you cannot remove them within an hour, place on the wound something stinging to prevent decay.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it remain until they are thoroughly dried near the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then their bones will be more easily affected.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	ouges: 1ud that is the ome tre aregard:
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you move so much that the decay is entirely bone.
puis restoure la plaie;	Then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of the decayed bone, coming close to the bulk of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it must be seared and covered all the way to decay, then heal until it is sound.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you seek an example and assistance in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man not thirty years old who had pain from within his leg of a certain origin
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	as the substances reached the leg and caused gangrene, forming a large abscess without any apparent reason to open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but because of their madness they worked so much until the abscess opened.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	And they consumed much matter, which became a fistula, causing great leakage and moisture throughout the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	They applied various remedies for two years, but there was no healing in the art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	Until I went to see them, and saw their leg and the medicines used to treat them,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	that s, thent is not so: 1. They are not:le de main. The body neither be it'lue but:
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the body of the youth became red again, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched a tent at one of these piers, and then searched for all the piers.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they were aligned with each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	ond ink:
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it ruined and smelled bad, and the decay reached up to the inner bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was that one who appeared of the decayed bone, and thought there were no other corruptions except for those which I had shown.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	what are lons tous, and was isnt, and not ctres and bones.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	And then you begin again, and discover the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And I found continuous decay in the bone, and the ligament, and then the joint, and I endeavored to rejoin them.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not join it within half an inch of the bone, and the suture failed completely,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	ether to get c.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And one must not resume treatment unless due to the patient's weakness who cannot endure.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of my fear of his death that I have.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For often it is bleeding profusely, but he was entirely healthy,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	the first; So that you as 9. If you were any to be the context by onchfat with ca:
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated thus:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take a ligature, and hold at the head of the fractured bone, where the break occurred.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command that it be extended upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	the discolor.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And they are extended outward, so you treat the corrupted flesh near its dislocation.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh at the location where it is swollen, ensuring that the sinew does not tear the flesh.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a piece of linen or a small table underneath the bone to support moving the corrupted flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	it’sis. che cg; and: the notch charte the that semen t; d'tle be bones:
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is within or in a part.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	Then uncover all of it; then place a hot iron beneath.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then apply the heat from one part to another of the corruption, and let it be as long on both sides of the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	patient.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	If the inflammation is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to use cold compresses.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	If the inflammamenet is in the wrist or ankle joints, and it is very severe,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	However, you must seek out that inflammation to understand how it manifests.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	of the bonetirionznt:
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And you shall know that surgical tools and needles for treating these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	c.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And you shall know which instrument your work will show you is needed, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And the witnessing of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And in this art, and many diseases;
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head swells or due to density, or due to weakness;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have tried the remedy for that erosion by the course of drugs, and they do not help,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	to be sure that can also, and:
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If from this the patient escapes death or illness, which is greater, due to the loss of a limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limb turns black as if burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	then after the blackness comes the consumption of flesh from one member to another,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	And it spreads throughout the entire body; if you rush to use a cooling poultice,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the sting of any poisonous creatures, such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar beings.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the infection is at the head of the joints, and it swells, do not give space for it to come near with the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	by c'izard le t; e:
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	When it comes to the arm, grasp with your hand; if it passes through the hand, then it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there are no remedies other than the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and thus you do when corrosion comes or spreads: if it arrives at the first joint, then grasp after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	c and m— it'sat they are not can be:
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it rises up to the leg, treat at the hip joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	If it comes up over the hip joint, there is no other remedy than for the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the way you bind or swathe the limb is such that you tie it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	Et étendons un maître les liens en dessous, et un autre maître les liens au-dessus.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And divide the flesh that lies between the two ligaments by a width of about half an inch until the bone is revealed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then cut or sew and place on each side a lining of flax-linen so that the suture does not touch the healthy bone,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	cI's the tudier fat a thuisse other et le o ; (that;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	If bleeding occurs while you work, then cauterize promptly at the site.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Then apply binding powders; and return to your medication until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the injured limb with a sanctioned bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	d (cause by an instrument to make that mono le tontion; TTell. The text of the pain de quant.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	It happened a blackening that seemed like scorching from fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corroding began first in his right foot, extending to cover the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he cut off the affected part of the foot with a knife, and it was healthy.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And for a long time after it returned to its place, or two-thirds of the hand, and came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed them under things that have an impact after bodily purification, and they could not cease the dislocations.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and I vowed to bind his hand, but I did not have hope of restoring the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	thedith: D'ulso they will be (1 and/whatever in fact <|
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the virtues of the body were weakened; he became despairing, and returned to his homeland.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and grasped a cup with his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not written this for the sake of what is done elsewhere, if it's necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	tue byet:
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it swells and breaks open, and within lies a bow, and the eye sockets remain vacant, like shells.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin above is as delicate as torn fabric.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not reach to bone nor nerve; such diseases are called 'healed'.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	the g:*tile (do not s...
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	However, if it is so stretched that it reaches almost to the bone on either side, it shall be called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the wound is such that you must cut away all the flesh around it, especially when it is fine and delicate as a piece of cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And not to avoid its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you believe that the skin is inflamed, and there is no rot at its core,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if the skin is rough like hair, then apply this type of laxative cleansing.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowl that holds it has a foul smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	it; a.
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ease, and oil, and litharge equally, and put to cook in a container over fire.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine turns red and thickens as honey does.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of it according to your necessity, mixing it in water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	not:
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medication to act for two hours, then extract it by squeezing out.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the wound is closed and the pus is discharged, and it is bathed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And never perform an enema with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, take ashes of wood from a grapevine and pour water over them.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then sieve it, and use it for an enema, until you are sure that the bowels are well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor Egyptian medicine or water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	. izzy: lais not, he says so s lisst week egt that c se ;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	When you cleanse with honey and sweet wine, let the honey have the property of purifying and cleansing.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine helps to remove impurities;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you ensure that the wound is well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	(1
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And it is that you pull out the splinters completely, and they do this with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you enemas with certain medications and salves, about which I have said the properties or treatments of salves.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if the nipple is small, and the tube for the enema cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	(and so youst:
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or balm of basilic, so that it may be spread;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, that he may leave so much only enough for there or for a clyster to enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound gap where the bowels are above, make it shall be below at what level there is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the bow is at its peak, do not let it slacken with ease.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	so arrange it in such a way that the bow goes to its lowest point.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	they do so that it; Do not so:fferm :
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the wound as it appears to your sight,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	then in such manner: that the bowl shall move slightly downward and nothing remains of the bowl.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take solidifying medicines to apply on the wound.
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	s.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then use your fingers to find the passage inside the chest; a bit wider than the first one.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Next, apply soothing oil on another piece of cloth according to the amount needed for the passage.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And place it over the chest passage to ease the swelling, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	as:possies:
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And know what has entered from the bow, whether it is poison or a small amount, or sufficient, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess present.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has spread in such a manner that you see its effects extending to the surface near the heart's edge,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if theytum: it. If heal: 4, and so that temble:
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then relocate it in the morning or after a day has passed, and when you open the wound.
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If there is a change in another bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are filled with undigested pus after many days, say that the breast is not at ease.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	, and incis:
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	When illness approaches. For there are people who wrongly apply heat to their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and suffer an indigestible pain in the breast after many days, knowing that the breasts are not swollen.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if they become hardened over time, and turn sour, then apply a medicine of drying substances that are moist in consistency but dry in virtue.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	s isd:
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take anointing oil, made with rose oil, and boil it with equal parts of old wine.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then he stirs it well, using it; and similarly makes thicker honey cooked in a more viscous manner.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when anointing oil is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	When you take myrrh and aloewood and incense, and grind it, and powder it with honey when it is on the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	Then take a piece of cloth, spread it over the breast, and never insert any rod-like instrument long into it.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of holy basil, which are like flour mixed with chalk;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	by.i d the you can'f:that if they first (120 on fire
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	When the wound is elongated and not treated by this remedy,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Then I say that corruption is at the root, and it makes an impression on the bone, or on hard tissues, or sinews.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if you're treating a fistula as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of abscesses of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Gangrene is an abscess that arises from under the nail at the base of the hand.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or on the foot, or sometimes it occurs in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and so: lflesh ;tide;
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they pour boiling water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps washes away entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And it comes to eroding until the bone, causing a stinging pain and bad smell, with wide joints and discolored skin.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if the remedy does not help at all.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary to cut away all the excess skin that has grown from the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then you shall cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	ounce to be, and, if:
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	When an ungula presses against the chalk, and it begins to prick, causing blistering.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	If necessary, place a bit of bread under the nail that is piercing.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and lift it upwards gently and subtly so as to remove the pressure from the chalk.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	by:
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply ointments until healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the erosion is in the bone, clean it with a spoon and drill, because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the knee eroding, scrape off a portion with a spoon as previously mentioned,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat until it is set right;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if they are wild, hold them down, and if it causes great pain, first stabilize them;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the fingernail with a sharp knife across.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	if they:
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if this occurs, place something upon it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the hand is throbbing.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The disease that occurs in some men's hands by chance consists entirely of flesh.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	by: the is to any they are not e’s, like, and does not sprain its very that s in;
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of these arise at the root of the joint, where the growth is among certain of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who arise in any one of our limbs do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those who arise in the joint of the limb, perhaps move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of those who are plump is made light in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Shape the area at its root with a wide spreader.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat; therefore, you should hold it firmly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	and: 1, and also that de bon:
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut the bone to an appropriate length with a saw, then treat it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that occur with joint assembly happen by birth, or from a wound's healing process, or from the scorching of fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to cut out that dislocation, so that the joint may be repaired according to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	lide:
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or place between two pieces of fine lead, until they are joined as it ought to be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the dislocation comes to either one of its sides with the palm, cut that swelling accordingly as it ought to be.
Des vils	To rid oneself of such ills
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are large swellings wrapped around, filled with excessive melancholic fluids, that come upon various body parts.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And it happens more often in legs of those who go to the bathhouse and work and carry, than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you provide no excrement removal at all times, and then the basilica washing of it.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of wounds is in two ways: one is to cut around it and drain the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is that you make an opening and drain completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting procedure is as follows: raise the first leg with hot water very strong until the large vein becomes clear.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	a ;s of f so, and de marse isso ke quilt: ça et with them if the cebbon line disie:
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then tie the vein at one point or two or three places, with a broad width.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then extract and pull out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the illness can tolerate.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then mix it, and instruct that he imbue with meats tinted black.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	the are youn:s, if theye ce fat, or ne:
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The movements of the patient are as follows: raise the affected leg with pain. If there is much hair on it.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then place it in a bath, and wait for the leg to be immersed in hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire and then wrap the long veins at the leg's top near the knee or in the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	for TWolf they C-be able:
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or touches skin it appears as a blue rope.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then remove the stitching from below until it is raised above the skin, and then attach it with light knots.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then cut in another place three finger's width above; then scrape the skin near the vein as long as it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	that they c
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then measure with another tool, or more as needed, then loosen it gently, and cut around the two elbow joints.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then stretch and loosen it up to the next joint; then extract piece by piece until all are out, then cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot pull and lift it, thread a needle with a strong double strand of thread through the entire area;
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	after:so far reputle:
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep it from slipping, for if it does slip, it cannot be drawn up or lifted, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have drawn it up completely, place a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, and not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	n’mjeward but:
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not pierce or tear, but it opens the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and here is its shape.
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein (referring to a specific type or location of vein)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	with:. c;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	Sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, due to rotting that comes from under the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	If as it comes within the body, snakes and worms, emerging between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this beginning boil are such that it causes a very large inflammation in the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	so t and, and lief if heu: ça; dont is the c. Se f de les maring that:n're in the sonde of failure.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is dislocated, it must be wrapped with a piece of linen about three and a half cubits to four cubits long, and the bandage ends.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the linen around the leg, and each time it is not at its place again, wrap it with the linen, and tie the bandage.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remainder, but do not cover it completely at its root until it is all used.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	e
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason it is necessary to treat it gradually until completion, without leaving anything behind.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And the vein has not moved at all when treated for five or six lengths.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And one day a man came to me, it was of six lengths, and when I cut (the vein), he poured out some pus or blood, and pierced all the way down to its base.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If it persists in doing so; and the matter within should be emptied, then treat it with properly prepared herbs for a certain number of days, then heal as one would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never touch the vein with your hands; particularly when it opens at the joint of the foot or ankle.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and this often occurs due to pressure; thus treat as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	after:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is called on our land "ox disease," because it often occurs in the buttocks.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it's a small worm that arises between skin and hair, and travels through the entire body moving up and down.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it is felt quite well from limb to limb as it moves along the skin where it goes, and jumps forcefully.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	with:
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	When there is doubt about its severity, for when it travels through the body, rising to the head, and reaching the eye.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	And perhaps enters, destroying the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it bleed and flow, it cannot be stopped unless when it moves.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	stiché ons;
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then apply a bandage and tie it off firmly, and if the wound is partially covered by the hair, cut into it until you expose it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If applying fire cautery, do so until it stops bleeding.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it causes is that they turn pale, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is proper to use a remedy of bodily concoctions of dissolving medicines for bad humors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And apply a paste made from meats that have decayed and putrefied.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain caused by windblownness (wind in the bowels)
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	de text al lingus: an's that cocde the t
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And then moves from member to member; and I see what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called upon by an ill woman, and found some swelling in the vein of her arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and shortly after that, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder;
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	c untizzy he said:
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	Then after some time it runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then he told me that it returned around the body as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	they:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Indeed, I wish to maintain that pain from one place moves to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I do not want this if as seen in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins exposed.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	ond:
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it does not appear on all those who are lymphatic, and have wet bodies and veins restored.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	it is not of le plus les est that; qui; ait so as for coles and the: de mais, ece que de. iciat thane ome or. Les d.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If gently to both sides you move it, then tightly wrap until that swelling is restored.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the wound; and if you cannot see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure is for those bumps that look like maggots, and foul pills, and other similar things.
Des saiettes	it doesn's. ça you;
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearances and the places on the body where they emerge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The varieties of them have arrows with large points, and small ones, those that are barbed, and those that are fused.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and there are some which have two corners, and others with tongues, and those having fragments.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	est coli't :
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	As for the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it dies in any of these members, and the sign of death appears, which I will tell you hereafter:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, as death comes in various conditions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When this ill sign is not evident, and there are no arrows in the front, then treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And when the sign of the brain is present and an arrow pierces the bone, and there are fragments above the skull.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there is blindness and heaviness and weakening of the eyes, and inflammebg and reddening of the tongue, and muscle twitches and mixing of thought, and bile-colored vomitus.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And from the wound flows white phlegm resembling hairs, and as it oozes like redness of rust.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign is revealed to you, pursue the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it remains in place.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign when the arrow comes out or blood flows from the body is that it's close to the left shoulder blade, and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	by the following them. If you ttobt; O'issons in so and name fuhlow (1, with all y Francis.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Then they feel doubt whether death will come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrowhead is that there are no traces in the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes complexion, and breathes deeply and seeks cold water.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead enters into the pelvic region, it is near the small ribs; and produces great swelling and pain, and breathing; and all limbs of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	heuze d; 1 (h: they s of gk: MDP.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrow pierces the belly and does not burst out through the intestines, there is no hope in treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the arrow pierces into the bladder and urine leaks out along with it, causing the patient great pain; be assured that such a wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, depending on how they are made and the collarbone and throat and shoulder and upper arm and spine and ribs and hips, and similar parts, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man whose arrow went into the base of his neck at its root.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and pulled out the arrow from another side past the ear fat, and was slightly better for a long time.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	e: th:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow was reset, reaching only the tip towards its base.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it was an arrow from a Turkish bow, made of light iron without ears; the shaft was whole, and no harmful incidents occurred to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And an arrow pierced the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I healed boils, and skillfully treated them until they were cured; thus was the Christian restored to health.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I removed an arrow from his belly, thinking he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days had passed, there was no change in his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	c;l's that les so:**Furderse and they should not the s. The Arab; Tad: M.20. In such as. Jhd by line Marsh Marcs the said it a (et pfere; What happens, followed that la: ous ca bail fe son
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrowhead fallen on his back or stomach, and the wound is sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and allow the arrowhead to remain within, without altering its natural position.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor should it be disturbed in any of its natural processes.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And behold a certain man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and his wound was grievous.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And it remains in such a way that they suffer great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And pierced an arrow into one of the king's subjects, who was in his lap,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	les s que do le:t cnt; that the :
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to healing after it had been three days. The wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried with all subtle remedies, and felt nothing at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he had no feeling of heat or pain from his right earlobe.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	in, the t it is done:
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I place an unguentificated poultice on the affected area for it does not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appeared to me as the arrow's wound.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the poultice for days, and healed the deep wound, thus the patient remained ill for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	by:f, ies t (so heumz but also the main.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a medicinal acrid water with hands until it was healed.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and tested it, feeling the head of the arrow return to its place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I placed in the wound opening with that same acrid water until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	l’tda onde cither d.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	Then straighten out if there is a wound where I clamped the pincers on either side and could not remove them.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I did not cease to subtly and cleverly devise methods of traction until one day with well-made pincers, I achieved it.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to the form that will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat and keep the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I will restore it then, and the wound is firmly closed, and the patient is entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Here is the translation:
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Here is the translation:
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	that; The same t (cemblete, and as the bon : s.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	True work involves nine operations, and nine instruments are used for handling extraordinary matters that arise in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say there are arrows lodged in the limbs either as they are buried deep or according to two ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by their own length or on one side; or from another direction;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	the ou n jumber se dont in a t sisst de othert:
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not heal now, let it rest until the cartilage is properly aligned and returned.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it has pierced the bone, and cannot be removed, let it rest for some days, adjusting each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And when it heals, and if it does not, pierce carefully through to make a very fine hole, until the space is expanded, then treat it accordingly.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	by what th; please: one3 TT 5 and d.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And of the occurrences that I have openly told to the patient: do not milk it, but let it rest until they are balanced after some days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if an arrow comes up to the armpit, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not lodged soleamo in bone only, and does not reach up to armpit,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And the patient sometimes remains without movement for several days due to an accident, then use the method of stretching.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is severely fixed and cannot be removed thusly as I have told you; then care for the head until it heals completely.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is reset in place on the body so that it cannot be seen, then search all over for it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument to pull it out.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	And if you cannot stretch the wound, nor deepen the arrow's entry;
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And there are no bones or nerves or veins, so it bleeds as much as the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	And extract the arrowhead as you may, and if there are ears where it holds.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If the bone is impaled by two parts that you can pull out, then
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And then break or bend the arrows' ears, as far as you can pull them.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And do so subtly that you do not break the arrow, but draw it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, lift up to the nearest resting place and then draw it, as pulling might relieve the strain of extraction.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	the paind in youre:s f le t, and by n they so:
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	And watch over the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a method so you may extract the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	Soon or late, firmly or gently; and place the patient as they were when the arrow fell upon them.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For it is the greatest aid that can be given to him; and if you cannot, then place them as their signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	s s.  (do-tlow but skell;
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Therefore do cut there, as long as the tongs can take hold of it, and then extract it; if it falls out forcefully now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if [the arrowhead] is caught in the bone, twist your round hand, until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if [the arrowhead] cannot be removed, leave it there for now, and then resume the extraction until it comes out forcefully.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	s.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it is pierced and you must administer a blow, then provide the instrument to be heated.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument, then administer a strong blow.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and mete ome so de lacks and they timesl;
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, it must be that you cut all around where the poison resides, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or pierces through to the belly, bladder, or ribs and is close by, and you can see it clearly, then cut around it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	the n'ot, or s s e t.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And care for it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and this one looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to use them: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape at the tip is also like that of a bird's feather,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	. Do so que theye t loinz; s f couchtide le les mal; Et se butto not ce Dead (a ils, and to noirse et emette arno: thar; as the bon, and la peu pleujck C'ere ti tref*
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pincers for pushing and probing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Veins from which blood is drawn are .25, therefore there are 16 heads.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	text al tissances desment it at the w times they ou you may be et de s veist, buttose est :s and also ast:
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries which are visible on both temples;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the temples of both ears, which are called 'sap' (taste);
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the veins that are at the forehead; and the veins that are on the temples of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two strings that are on his head.
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are called "auricularies".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that lie under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	les pennant, a ce taches;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	The one is head-related, and it's on the left side of the ribcage, and they call them "vessels at the top."
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the middle one is called "fast," and it's composed of both head-related vessels.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call them "vessels of the heart," and the base is on the right side of the ribcage,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	The breeches are called by the laymen "the belly of wind," and it is located below the scrotum.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And that which one probes, clearly situated above the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little vein is between the ring finger and the pinky, and if it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	t. The sile; e ce ne: 's O for any le Tiraie by the heart; if none theym�. So it is not d
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second sprain which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nese," that is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And on the other leg, there are three veins under those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The pain from veins located behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	.c.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub it with an abrasive cloth where the veins are; then tighten the patient's neck with a cord.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	Until both veins appear behind the ears in two spots near the top:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Cut then at your two thumbs and where you sense hair loss above your thumbs, if necessary.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	as thist
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Et enveloppe et le cuir et la veine bien avec deux doigts de large, et fait entrer dans les artères, et fait sortir du sang jusqu'à ce que vous voyiez.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and bind it, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	; don’s the ne: byt s ;fier tre le de la crople to date is not be no un bon line ond� Tud in that all.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And swelling, and accustomed paralysis, and at the body of tears to their eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and its quality is so like what I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it's that the patient has no connection to his neck, until both veins appear distinctly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	byt:
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the flesh above the vein with your index finger towards your elbow joint, and insert the lancet from below.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Lift the vein upward, and cover it, as you have done in two other wounds, and make a proper incision for blood according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	le sebut quet, the o f de lesse:ssand s’t sonme; that they is the tounge on lide le c're.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then bind it firmly, and let it remain until healed; and we have spoken of their coping and extraction, as the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the veins in the forehead is just as valuable for cerebral illnesses, and for ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and for reddening.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is that the patient turns away his neck until the veins appear.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	ki ben; la so by bon tdd and b�le or Rue.
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point over the vein, and elevate with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then apply a bandage to the patient's neck and secure the vein so that it is straight and not crossed by any artery or large vein.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it should not be too tightly bound; and the sinew perpendicular to the bone, because the bone is near, and sometimes it breaks the sinew when it is thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	the following:
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	The nature of their strength lies in the patient stretching his neck by twisting a certain ligament as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then be the strength of the sinew, and it is to take with some length and breadth of skin without any flaw.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And be the blood is well executed by skill and so does not die if you are skilled then done. Then it shall know wherefore, and do; Et en la morts; and so the art doute, car of as our lord, est de f in this place et flaime tant de tuit par le be a lieu, or l’artie, que li art du fait is sient les mallardien on.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The blood of the vein when it is drawn causes ague, dysentery, and illnesses from foulness.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as if migraines come upon the face, and rash that appears on the skin, especially when it is longstanding.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the nature of such blood draws causes the patient to have a tight neck, then strains his nose towards your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	; as is s ct such that the in de mort by ae; Oud if they be nim: 'empirik. As
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the veins do not open well at first, but now the blood starts to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not let it bleed too much at once, and allow the blood to flow according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, as it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	the ouz faire li* ouger if he said that you it istose prie la les que the old. I’s.gis ; t and to:S, they can be, should c; O; d. The Lord Chir colfie ond. Don'his line:
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the wound is such that the patient stretches his neck from one side to the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master be above the patient's head, and the patient sit on a seat.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then show the vein for a little while, then bleed the blood promptly, or as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	la ou de que: untles m; the on that he; they so you must be no c (1e may not asto se lo-C� a**.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The patient's limbs do not strangle; and let it lie until morning, that the wound be healed.
De la sainie des leivres	From the cleansing of lice
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleaning of lice from the lips helps to clear infection in the mouth, and gum disease, and cracks on the lips, and bad breath and itching.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	by c lad resinse ne let is alye of s d ster de the n't.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lip, and examine both veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and observe them closely to see that they are black, with fine small veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Therefore touch both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	d sis a; that the con lespire quill as l'se te; that n: nd est la. The same de the bone t.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the inflammation beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	From the inflammation of veins that are beneath the tongue, it assists after cephalic inflammation, and it is from throat constriction, and from eye diseases, and mouth ailments.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of inflammation is that patients scratch between their hands in front of the sunlight, and they lift the tongue, and look beneath each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	ly; (doze:e if heu ne ben proupser laisle que they.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the arm which are commonly punctured are bled according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or in puncturing all with one type: a broad syringe or fine needle as sharp as cutting ones, and are called "anesil":
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and subtle according to the width and extension of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of this mistletoe plant is much renowned and very broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is the blood and cause it has to be known by your sover and in it is widely troubla necte se cauz est, as you doivent tresin.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	This is the form of the olive bile:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is finer pointed, and meant for collecting subtle veins, where there is a subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The sanicle of the esophagus, which is one such vein, helps with diseases that are from the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	in;
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it grazes an artery, with blood flow resulting, one must staunch it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it should not be gripped in the flame but cut neatly as taught.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the base does not open clearly, one must extract it and use another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	ly so that m atri que sontt lesse
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the hose to the joint is bound with a bandage as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the location of the sinew, then as before extracting the arm, feel for the bones until you locate them.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	the les poinque est pas, il beings ne sont is toi:
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And ensure you do not wound the artery when you see it swoln, for it is of the artery; avoid it accordingly.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding upward like a child's urine, and the wound is red and thin, know that it is from the artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten to do so, and place your thumb lengthwise, then remove your thumb if the wound is unstable, which happens many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	emt the ou ful Land Kebone (1: but de la t; se ougreumble; the ole c. Do not;
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not closed and it bleeds, and the physician does not have medicines, tie the artery if it opens; for they pull back at the head; and close the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a slice of fresh meat, and break it, and take one half and bind until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the wound is closed, that's good; if not, then heal it with powders that stop bleeding as we have said.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	The latchets are not always found in various positions due to the small location of the wound and the strength of the limb's joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The sanies from the vein are drawn so that it helps to drain blood above the head and below the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilar and cerebral regions, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	the ou N a book:
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it swells and the nerves become irritated, and sometimes cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, you must cleanse the instrument again; and avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is no touch it the veuine, then they are l'a cauterisee.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The temple of the head helps, drawing blood to the brain, and assisting the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is appropriate to treat by pricking at the temple near the olive bone or myrtle pit, for this is the most beneficial of all bloodlettings, as there are no nerves or arteries nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one should always choose the less severe location first, and do not cause pain during the initial treatment, and then repeat.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	. The same: d their; in English:
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is according to your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing, it is that a wound is not repaired but only to preserve health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	the laisss to the Do theyt;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should begin healing with frequent bathing in warm water, and during autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And one should begin healing the first day or third, after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing for diseases is not determined by a set time, but that it should be done whenever needed, during the day or night, at all hours and times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	* (prenfludirus t; ça:
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not let them raise their hands who are old, those who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to raise their hands in any way, it is necessary that they clear the intestines with a mild cleansing.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw excess from the intestines harming the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	et d: MKle-bound they have ti se tiles the ou Fust; s
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if the spleen is affected after a passion of colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination and defecation in women and men, waking and mating, affecting all aspects, whether by something from the weapon or the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly remove the humors if it is large, with foods and drinks and medications, as you have the power to do so.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Next, enter a bath unless something prevents it, for subtly removing the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And cleanse of blood within a cloth around the wound on the neck as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard against work, pain, lustfulness, and similar things on that day.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And be fasting and joyous, and let the surgeon be higher than those being bled, and rub their arms twice or thrice.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then stretch the ligament slightly, because if it is too tight or loose, you cannot straighten it without causing harm.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and feel warm.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then soak the stitches with a little old oil, and place your right thumb over that vein near the area you want to strengthen.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	That the vein does not break when struck with a blow.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flow as thickly as cords in the arms of a mastiff, and some so full of bloodiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if when it is placed above the flame, then drawn back to the flame and cannot open the vein, thus they are of this kind.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	le vent the g've ond lately
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If the vein works for the first time, it is good; if not, restart from a little below that place where it was last performed, unless the joints are swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	If the joint is swoln and the patient becomes hopeful, let it be a day or two, but do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps he will come to have abscesses again; do not enter into baths, then resume the treatment if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	that f.dj; they.t. They are the bon  and so by Md; that youre t and#
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And handle it a bit hastily so that the wound may swell; for this often occurs when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound swelling, do not attempt to reopen it, and apply a bit of oil linen, for it eases the body's pain and softens the area with the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus apply the linen soaked in oil to each vein you treat, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	l’s a (as:
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes an abscess large in size, which occurs many times, especially when it is not cleanly opened that time or the opening of the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hasten to act, and place a damp sponge in hot water and salt, then strain it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the blood has been drained from the vein, and if it remains at the site for several days with any black or green discoloration, there is no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, place upon any thing of olive oil or myrrh mixed with the juice of sweet marjoram, a balm, or similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times it leads to an abscess and appearance of gangrene on the body's surface: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the lump soft under pressure with your hand, then that is a harmful sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not place upon anything that we have said previously, for there is a chance it may involve an artery; but give the lump a dry poultice to harden it, then treat with another remedy until it heals healthily.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each of the four humors according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thickened, let it thin out again; and if it is too warm, allow it to cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And one who is pale and weak, and in need of bloodletting, should have a wider incision made, with broad openings.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	s, but and the ou not so
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of healing is free from blood deterioration and nerve congestion, and it moves so that the joint is not long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those whose body needs the joint healing, give them bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if it is exhausted, bleed three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they are of cold complexion, feed them bread soaked in sweet syrup or honeyed fragrant syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and very aromatic syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it smells of rot after the release of much blood, then one must make an infusion of strong ale and sweet, fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And employ other remedies as we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope to facilitate venous evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if you wish to drain his arms, and otherwise bandage again as needed when they are greatly swoleby moisture so that he may be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his humors continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	they lete and t; (fudse ; but.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to heal on another side, shall do so on the second day or third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood inside the body that has become overheated, and it causes fever; then one must extract a large quantity, and dilate the passage until it defecates with great effort.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you heal all parts of the body and place your hand over the pores when it sweats, so that death does not come at the defecation.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	bychin:t[s�re the follow the in a on the e t and them.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary when you see a dislocated arm, to cause blood to flow out the second time, and keep the wound closed, by pressing firmly above.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is cramped, extend the arm quickly, for this would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	But let it heal the second time; or at the point of throbbing pain, until blood flow ceases from the vein wound.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	in ge t:  s
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is empty, leave it alone and do not bind it until the abscess is eased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if bleeding is necessary a second time, either from the same place or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	and do they pus mete s’er in:t that f, or cite:
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	The manner of applying hot water is such that the patient places their hand in warm water until the fingertips are red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then they should bind it securely, so that the bandage appears tight and right, now applying it across without being too loose or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and it should be wrapped wide, and well-fitted to the hand joint, without any leaking out, if so then put the hand in warm water again, and let blood mix with the water until there is enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	me t: (th; Tarn've. The ou n' s, but the her plel ben tant; f as and so lespliir line: c.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the sinew of this vein is more preserved than others, with no vessels or nerves present.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The sinew of the thumb on the right hand is valuable for all diseases related to the liver, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand, and immerse in hot water until the veins are flushed out, as one sees it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if you sever it crosswise, and if you cut it completely through, there is no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not remove too much, as nerves are easily exposed and damaged from being severed.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then place the hand in warm water, if the vein is frozen at the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as needed, put oil and grease on the vein to quickly bind it, and do this with each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The pain in his left hand is due to the mouse disease, and do as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The pain in the hip is due to all diseases that are from under the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	t
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is such that the patient often takes hot water in which stones have been placed, and rubs it on the vein until it cools.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And he lies above the dislocated bone joint; and the vein is at the ankle, with many streams flowing from it.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Heal there or where wider streams are present at the anelet, with motion as needed.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you lift up the foot, watch for the nerves above it and cross the tendon as when clipping hairs; let the flesh be evenly cut.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sinew cannot exit, place the foot in water and ensure that the vein empties well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the ligaments are not severed on the first try, start again above a little later, as the joint is tender;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	t's and i: Sont:1, in de t, so que se les su : the acfalte sont; And le losble et ce sonle ten C'ra ou n'ster.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The root of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its inflammation causes pain in the hip when it's hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the nature of its inflammation is that the patient must lie on a bed and stretch above the ankle by four fingers twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise it will not open up; and if it does open, so the inflamed area in all ways that you can see, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	e t
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	If you cannot find it, then tie any part of it that opens or splits in the back and along the spine to the small toe, and watch for numbness.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make as much of a tourniquet with the cloth that you see is needed, then untie the bandage and place cotton over it, and hold in place; now it has been healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	The linen swabs
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	the t. Et durntul.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this wind-striking is as though it were striking twice: sometimes it is at high heat, or with heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And wind-striking which is done by striking and blood extraction occurs in 14 parts of the body:
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Question: and dose mors. And it so as and that te extract les cure la doue the tissong, et vent s’en done the lons et que drain the fers de teiris li quide of a est extrait by eyne le ce tooth extracted;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	Et deux autres dans les deux côtes du cou; et la vésicule sous le menton.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the vesicle on each shoulder; and the vesicle above the elbows.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And ventouse tu hors de the contenir s, mais too much too ouvert la voiture. So and vent cest si pas too hands; Et dventres soi: et ouverte l’ovrir with open too the bras; les ventues du plustrois ventre bien toussovelles too heuettes too li vents de, le mains.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the application of leeches to both ankles; and bloodletting does not draw much blood, but rather small amounts scattered throughout the body.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore do not fear any harm, as with proper bloodletting;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	the they s to le un; and te iste lese temps:
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illness it is time to exorcise, or for customs, we perform each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day in between.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they have need to exorcise, do so with great weight;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and for those who encounter fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness around the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	t; c.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are such things as thinking and seeing through blood and painfulness and death and similar matters.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is within the month, we order to evacuate after three hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The treatment of the brain helps with the severity of the head ... which comes to them, and it must not be before the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	I ue; when they:
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it is not necessary for those of cold constitution to use it, or who have scrofula, as they would be greatly harmed by it.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore, not even the vigilant should use it, nor those with head cold ailments.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often get better become negligent, and therefore it is advised to apply the cupping therapy somewhat more cautiously due to fear of relapse.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	t (t annoitner.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And to cutting of the gland ducts, and tissues, and inflammations.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is appropriate to apply pressure gently, for if held too tightly, there may be obstruction or stomach and chest issues.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Ventosities are two ribs causing pain in the neck like toothache, otitis and migraine, along with strangulation and pain at the root of teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is located near the altar of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand in placing it there, without severing an artery or causing bleeding outwards.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventosities under the chin are associated with mouth diseases, gum decay, and similar illnesses present in the mouth; they are located near the altars of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause illnesses arising from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	Windings in the elbows are as much like those of three arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the vessel is filled with blood and has veins and arteries beneath it.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping over the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and illnesses underneath them, it should be large and made of animal skin that needs to be well stretched; and sometimes, if they were subtle, they would break, causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings on the legs drain blood thoroughly, as they draw blood from all over the body; they are beneficial for old pains of the limbs and testicles, and bladder issues, and relieve the flowers; they are in place at the .ij. groins, and the .ij. ankles, and moreover, they weaken the body after long use and bring about swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you place it first empty, and then quickly, put on hastily, and move equally, and do not stop doing so, until you see there redness and swelling, and the bruise appears with dark blood; then remove, and reapply the cups, and take care in the arrangement of limbs, for there are some who have tender skin and clear pores: it is necessary to pierce once only, and make wide, somewhat deep cuts; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it should be pierced twice: the first time to facilitate the flow of thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very dry, it should be pierced a third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we only do so once at most.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	If we wish to let much blood, often reopen the wound; and if the vein is spared, cut it deeply, and finish so that the core is pierced firmly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And it is for those who have large and hard veins, and are difficult to access, that you should anesthetize the bubbles of oil with soothing and dissolving properties.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is such, of purple oil or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is with olive oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amartine or balm of Gilead, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the one to whom you give tender hairs wide at their ends, there is no need to put oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should get up easily, or use myrtle water, and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of secu, or aniseed infusion or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And it is not proper to apply a bladder before or after the bath but an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventosation.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And one must wash oneself when it is to be vented and when they have been vented.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And let those who are ill with cholera and whose blood is too much and inflamed wash themselves.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	Jent and there ;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And you must also provide nourishment such as porridge, fresh cheese, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with cold constitutions, make a syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, along with small amounts of porridge, fresh cheese, small birds, and squabs.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and each day they shall breathe out the winds, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	theirtfe with them.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it is to be subtly increased until he drinks hot; but one must not do this unless they are very thirsty.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are applied without causing pain are those placed over the liver, and kidneys, and gout, and abdomen, bowels, urine, and legs, for these limbs cannot tolerate being pierced anywhere.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And this is done only to draw blood from one member to another.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	:s the s an :
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And it causes pain when there is obstruction or stone, and if by chance the obstruction attracts back to its place, or moves away from where it should be.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	Thus it does when placed upon the liver and intestines if there is retained gasification.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these cups are made hollow to draw out as much only; and never at once with fire, nor ever plain water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	by far li;
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with heat is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers in width and half the length of the hand, with a small hole around the middle as to insert an arrowhead.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and be made of glass before it does not weaken the patient when applied to the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	the.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they vary in size and type according to the diseases and nature of those who contract them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's bulging are unlike old ones, and lean like fatty ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And you should place this swelling upon the limb thusly:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take a candle of wax or similar substance, and place it amid the swelling across the shaft which is amidst the bulging:
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	ond.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it upon the limb, and turn your thumb over the aperture as we have mentioned; when desired, so that air goes in and an ointment is applied.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And apply the salve as before, and repeat often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the blister that is used for pleurisy, without any penis or aperture, it's only made when full of water and placed on the limb.
et c’est li forme:	(th; That are m, so ; s, bones t-flemente l’s de la ben est pley f, then le text pesze ou Ront con la com sa peu suler que.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Dislocations are not managed unless in limbs where it is impossible to apply cups for their smallness, as with lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in nerves of the heart, such as veins or nerves, and other like areas.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the nature of this condition is that when you find dislocations that are in soft gentle places with some protrusion, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	byt s HF for a c
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	Then provide a healthy vein and compress, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply bandages.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are smooth and sore, if it's in place or where you can apply a compress, then do so, for this is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the area gently and wash with water thoroughly, then squeeze out well;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	:prson s (at say so e't tenty ascribe by ca Cod git the original. JPGe the same with and le benet, tota thera. Do not make et al chast C. And et la ou: Mme a I hate wa la ce f that est des forme ça man:
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	If there is a multiple occurrence of pus, apply crushed alum or oak bark and similar things until it is healed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or place the half-moist mashed beans on it and leave them until they dry out in their place, then bandage now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more need of it, take other medicaments.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	in the same:
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then place them there, and as soon as they feel his blood, so do they shrink back.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are weeping, sprinkle some alexanders and hedge-nettles or ashes upon them, so they will dry now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These treatises are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they restore broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know that the wise son, my dear friend, embraces this treatise which they have never seen in any of the old books, nor read letters about.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is strange knowledge on our land, as I've never found a good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	Et je ne sais rien d'autre, même si grâce à la connaissance des anciens textes dont j'ai étudié beaucoup pour avoir une expérience de leur savoir, ainsi que par l'expérimentation et les habitudes de ma propre existence.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and summarized at the end, clearly showing the forms of the treatments that are administered, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say that the preamble of this book contains the essence and wisdom of its chapters, so those who are experienced apply their understanding to truth, allowing them to know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	When fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs on any part, it is necessary to support the patient from both sides and parts if nothing supports them completely, as with weak bodies, children, or elders.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the tension is not too strong or too cold, and consume frozen joints, such as cold feet, bird feathers, and horse hair, do not drink wine, nor any fatty foods, and do not fill up too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess or matter spreading in the limb; then it is advisable for the patient to rest as they have been used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that cause swelling or viscosity, such as boiled wheat, rice, eggs, beans, veal, chicken, fresh fish, and strong wine, along with similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	When with gradual dislocation, movement is soon followed by fractures.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that fractured old and worn-out bones cannot be well mended or joined as per their natural state to strengthen the limbs, nor those like the bones of very young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not rush to set the broken bone with a large splint that binds and joins the limb together until it is strong as before; and let it all heal properly, and for this reason one should nourish oneself with hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	by the bolejles Que c; If you say b: OU; ça finge t m and so et se ou n'ilz ne bon line: Ca: Jarn’s.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When the break of the head is different from the break of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that go with rotation, and others by bending, as the length of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture accompanied by a tiny split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	s ue
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known to be a fracture of the bone because the joint is twisted and openly broken at the end, near the palm.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no curvature or touchiness, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no breakage.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well have curvature, or tear, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move your hand at all, but apply the medicines that come next and then gently hold it in place.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which is healing, and are the two parts rejoining, you should now align them evenly, as with abscesses when they appear.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses occur, leave it for a day until the abscess is soothed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	the 1 are not. Ic;
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	When the bone is broken into pieces, if they are pulled apart by two parts, whether hands or feet, or from your hand when it's small limbs, or between two tendons, or one tendon and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural shape, so when the broken parts of the member are separated, reset them by all means and set them in their places where you can move them, and ensure that with your work there comes no injury or pain to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And properly align well both ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels severe pain in the arm if it seems to you that it is not well: so treat gently, and do not strain or press as those who cause abscesses and heat and shrinkage of the limb by their methods have often seen us do.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is about to reach its limit, gently restrain the patient so they do not move, neither while awake nor sleeping, turning or in any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the limb is securely positioned so it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	When it feels no pain at all or almost none, then one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep watch to ensure it is set correctly, so twisting does not occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb follows what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	; forment the c; The Chir, they so that is: corue me: the Juda de laise:n't. Do not to a. Preter. Here: theu said; in this t.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members such as arms and legs and similar limbs: it is appropriate to wrap them in soft fine linen.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, like thighs and legs: it is appropriate to wrap them in a wide sturdy bandage, for the wide bandages encompass the entire large limb, and strain evenly on all parts without any slippage.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then place three or four light towels along the limb, and tighten one end of the bandage slightly across all parts, then move up above the fracture and loosen it so that the fracture is less strained than the rest. Then pull away a bit from the fracture;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the sinew a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the joint's healthy position, then take another ligament, and carefully return to its proper place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go back to the area above the fracture and strain it moderately, not too much or too little, as we have said in the first instruction mentioned above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place strips of lin or fabric between the ligaments so that they are all equal, then tie it above a bandage and then place well-made splints underneebefore if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing balm to the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then hold the splints in place, and let them be of moderate length from a wide reed or wood used for making grooves, or palm fronds, shaped as follows.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, the splint that is placed over the fracture must be a bit thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	by other.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then it is strung above the splints in the same way as you did with the first reset, then laid down on a bandage like in the initial setting over the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	More tightly it is made, less loosely; and it is proper that the bandage be of moderate width, not too thick nor too thin, and be made of flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the bandage is too thick, as I have seen in the works of the peasants who make their cord ends from flax twine, and it's a great mistake, because the cord cannot be evenly spaced if it is too fine, nor should there be less than two fingers' space between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the shoulders of their extremities after being strained into place, then apply cotton or raw wool rags beneath them so they do not slip.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the head is broken, I will tell you the remedy for this below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not happen to pull out all the bones of a limb broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	t or.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	This is how the ancients used to repair fractures, dislocations, and twists: you take flour that stands against a mill wall, mix it with plenty of water, and create this concoction, which should not be too clear nor too thick, and use it as such. It is the common method for restoring fractures in various positions, especially in women and small children, because it is neither too cold nor too hot.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of dressing to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: take pitch from pine resin and olive oil and onion juice and frankincense and gum arabic, each .x. Z.; myrrh and aloes, each .v. З.; camphor .viij. Z.; and make powder, mix with honey and plenty of water; if the person's complexion is hot, use this dressing as it has good composition and quickly heals broken bones, and works well for many individuals.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another dressing method that works for twists: take gum arabic and cinnamon, each .x. Z.; myrrh and aloes, each .viij. Z.; arsenic .v. З.; bolus Armenian .x. З., and grind well, then mix with water or plenty of water, and apply it to the affected area.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to treat dislocated joints and bones out of place is as follows: take new thread, grease it with wax and oil, then place it on the site. These bandages do not restore position but are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly alleviating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of bandages that restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthy wood leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of bandages for bone healing and reducing the remaining swelling: take wormwood root, chamomile, violet flowers, bran, from each part; grind it, then mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply it moistened with coriander water or just water.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of plastering more effective than the first, when chronic abscesses occur in limb restoration. Take roots of valerian, and seeds of flax, balm, mallow, and lavender, all equal parts; crush and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not put anything other than a mixture of wax and oil on a broken limb for healing, except if it is too soft or too hard between two layers.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems like Galen suggests that on a broken limb for healing, one should use dry substances that are somewhat warm, such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method for making an emplaster to soothe pain and inflammeblend of hairs from scalps, or feathers of birds, and wool alike, all finely ground, and made into a paste.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then you rub it on afterward, and be careful that the patient feels no pain or has moved any bones from their place; if not moved by hands within a few days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the area, or itching, relief, swelling, quickly remove and reset (the joint), and remove the emplaster now; take a light cloth, and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse (it) in water, and lift it up until the itch subsides, and be relieved of pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry bandage with flour and water or oil roseate, and bind it to a stick, until you are sure of the abscess heat.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and alleviate its pain, then gently reset with a bit of opiates, and do not bind it as tightly as before; gradually until it is well-adjusted.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and warm and painful and swollen, and you need opiates and linen, then reset as before, similarly to how it was done initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not reset unless after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and each time leave for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the dislocator feels at ease, and approaches nearing joint alignment.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then you must reset it more than before, and the tissue swells up as I have said earlier; and if you see that there is dryness beyond necessity, know that inflammations cannot come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Arise the wound with warm water each time you dislocate it, and do so every day, and wash the sore area.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Thus by this method you cut the tendons of the limb and quickly follow what skilled physicians do to properly reset a twisted member: it is bad, and such procedures are fearsome, and I see nothing else but the use of traction and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures there are, and diverse shapes, and the causes differ.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are fractures made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way to the sacrum which is below the spine, as if made with an axe or club; and for this reason it is called "hachure" type of breakage.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword breaks through above and is called this type of fracture "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impacted blow, crack, neck bone fracture, or fall onto the spine, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fissure that reaches the tunic which lies below or above the bone, where the wound may be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has penetrated the bone as subtly as fine hairs, and it is a small fissure, and hence this breakage is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made or by striking with an iron object, or falling, or similar cause, and the piece of bone enters inwardly, and the hole above it exists as do the holes for pots when they are set on their stands; so between the pot and the stand.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more often with those whose bones atop are wet, just as in children.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens through various types of fractures where small pieces become separated, such as fragments; and I will speak about them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all types of fractures by displacement underneath them, and the incisions on sinews, and by the corroded cartilage which is beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	And they; (et d do not as he sonte t and ous le trementd; that are the ou pr* est: S, so it.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, beware of accidents to the patient, and if you see any bad accident such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the suffering comes first to you, and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day when you can move it.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is like this, and you remove the bone within seven days, so that the tissue under the bone becomes corrupted, then come the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	If the bone fracture reaches the tissue covering the brain, then you must cut the broken part thus: and take out the skull where the patient is wounded severely, and reveal it above the bone in all possible ways, and below the wound's contour as much as possible.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	If blood flow occurs and the bone or abscess is exposed, do as needed to help him, and it should be that you fill the cavity with moistened cloths in oil of roses.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And make the wound rest until the abscess is pacified and blood flow ceases; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done in two ways of treatment: one way is that you cut at the narrow opening front, which is effective.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed or made of iron; and when performing lightly, do not cut deeply into the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	If the bone is out of place and hardened, it must be approached on all sides, making indentations with tapered instruments without piercing beyond the outer layer of the bone, ensuring a margin or circle around which the point does not pass; thus several should be made so each finds its spot at the edge of the bone, having tapering points for all tests; these are the three forms of tapered points.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of cutting around the fractured bone is to place one tapered point on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tapered point slightly, doing so all around, and with incisors cut the space between the perforations as subtly as possible, gently, as we have said, until you feel the bacteria on your hand or any of the tools that resemble pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone pierced and cut, it is appropriate to remove any protrusion that remains from the bone with an instrument similar to scissors, but it must be finer and more subtle than the other cutting instrument.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	If it remains anything from the small bones or scales, gently apply to one of the strains; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is what the Galen says, which is much wiser; and it holds strong, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose the bone part where the break opens up; and once you have exposed that part, then place atop the blade of this crescent-shaped incision tool, which has the following shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut through entirely, and the painful part is in two sides of the bone, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then gently tap with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly strike the entire bone, and be careful not to hit the covering below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is close to the bone, gently touch the bone, because you do not want to harm or cause fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce all the way through to the skin and is cut only from above, with small fragments remaining, you should attend to that sharpness again, and remove the scales with a fine razor in which various quantities must be used, so as to apply most appropriately to each location according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you approach from great heights, then proceed with more subtlety, and continue in this manner until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of these hair cutting and subtle fractures, it is necessary to adjust according to its direction; and this is something that cannot be simply restored for those who have studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sinew is exposed, it is necessary to take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and smear with oil-rosin, and place upon the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	bys; the 1 and if the text; a m on les chme en t
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	Allow it to remain as such for a day or two until the swelling of the abscess is calmed, then release it, and apply medicines like lily roots, barley flour, frankincense powder, and aristolochia, along with similar things; from these substances make powder, put on the wound, and apply thereafter medicinal ointments without causing a burning sensation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	Ensure that the wound is kept clean, without leaving any ointment or allowing it to gather dirt, as when dust accumulates over a fabric covering the brain, it wrinkles and hardens, causing great harm; for when one applies something mordant such as snake venom from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, should any unfortunate event occur to the patient as we have mentioned, it is doubtful and uncertain.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no blackness comes except from the medicine applied, and it has power, then one must take part of honey, and three parts of rosy oil with a linen cloth, and apply it to the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then perform treatments as necessary until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two pieces of the neck above are broken, or one by another, for they are bones; and the underside is cartilaginous, does not break but rather bend or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger or thumb into the nose near it, and place an equal break in your index finger, and up to the nostril on the other side, until the flap returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot bring the finger to its place, it is appropriate that you put a little bit of grease on the top of a small stick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	When the fracture is of two parts, repair it similarly, and hasten to restore it by the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But after the seventh or eighth day, when the inflammation of the wound is soothed, then dress it with fine linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you dress it with another kind of cloth on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be thick enough to fill up the openings in the skin.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	the other, with the ben; and bon; en s.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	At no time should you place goose feathers near the tent openings, and if they are in a certain sleeve, and there is a breach, and it blows on the sick person; do as follows:
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the patient while you work on it, then put some grease or cotton wool in oil roseate, or a small portion of diacron.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not come to the patient, then apply plaster with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with goat's milk. Then place it on light gauze, but do not bind the patient or their limb too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	If the nose break is small and it is broken into tiny pieces, extract with suitable splints, then make the incision, and treat various other injuries, as appropriate plasters and ointments for this case.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no damage to the nose and it only has bruises, treat with bandages and apply poultices until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	From the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound, the fractures are not severe, nor are they broken in two, unless the inner part has swelled, which can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fractures are in the right part, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fractures are on the left mandible, insert your index finger from the right hand and gently press the fracture internally, while stabilizing it with the other hand gradually until even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced by two joints, it should be that you make an adjustment with a length equal to the parts.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movements of the teeth occur or grinding, then restrain with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place on the fractured jawbone cerotype, and lay over a double cloth; and lay over the cloth a large well-made stone, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie it as you may see fit, and command the patient to rest, and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, reset it daily, and then set what has changed back to its proper state; and place an ointment over it, with a powder of finely ground herbs or flour from sesame seeds, after you have removed the cerotype; and place a light linen over the ointamen
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when abscesses appear, treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	When there is a break and wound together, ensure none of the bone has been broken out; carefully extract the splinters with fine instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, enlarge it gently according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have extracted all these pieces of bone and it no longer remains in the wound, then dress the wide wound, and place on fine stitches to close it up until it is healed.
de la forcele	(tirq; If: C.n's." est s.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The great break occurs many times at the shoulder, and breaks in three ways: where it is broken and torn apart into two parts with pieces, and it is easier to repair; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when there is a fracture with a wound, so you have two assistants: one who holds the broken shoulder that has suffered the break, and the other extends the neck towards the injured part; then place the fracture evenly between your hands so that the shape is as it should be, without any appearance or unevenness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place the shoulder of the patient under a round rod made of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your necessity; then stretch and elevate the break, holding the rod with one hand and placing the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation due to it coming in from the front, then it is fitting that the patient lies over their injured side, and places a middle-sized earring under the shoulder blade, while you, as minister, push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the dislocation rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then approach the break of your bone, and if you find any fragments, it is necessary to cut below; gently extract the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, place this instrument on the dislocation area to prevent infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it appears like a spoon, not sharp at the edges, and is to be of the width necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the flesh; and have two blades, if you see that need, with one being wide and the other narrow, as are the borders of the wound where you have treated when separating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of an abscess's heat, if it is a small wound, or if you doubt the size of the abscess, warm the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes forth, apply oil-soaked cloths and linens soaked in wine, and place on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The splinting of a bone when it is not painful or swollen, place on the bone plaster mixed with powdered molasses and sheep's fat, add light gauze pieces on top, and set a rod underneaturally if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of palm width, then place a double folded towel over the protrusion, and the splint; then take a slender rod three fingers wide in length and circumference, and wrap it around the band so that its head remains level.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the rod on the dislocation, turn the band around the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the injured one; and bind each part, and when you see that the rod holds the joint firmly in position, and it is clear to you that the rod does not move over the broken bone, then reward him every day, and if the ligaments loosen, then tighten again.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And make the injured person lie on his back, and place a small pillow under their shoulder when they sleep to raise the shoulder upward; this will relieve the dislocation of the joint by supporting the shoulder, as you fasten the arm to the neck, and do not allow it to slip in an unfortunate way until 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then restart the plaster, if it appears to be necessary, and strain and leave it as such until restored; and it is restored in at most 28 days, and sooner for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder is not moving and cannot be moved by force; if you adjust according to the pattern of the breakage, and bend it in all ways as much as possible; then put powdered flour on the wound with plenty of egg whites, and light gauze; then place a double bandage over it, a little wider than the shoulder, without any stitches elsewhere on the shoulder, so that you use linen thread for stitching, ensuring that the suture is evenly cut; and then strain firmly with all your strength, such that the bone does not move from its place, and observe the joint every day; and each time it swells, strain again, and if the bandage comes loose or moves away from its original position, adjust it and apply a poultice on the painful area of the shoulder; and the broken shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when these numbers are fulfilled, release the stitches, and be careful, for it's not bone that sets lightly again.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of bone protrudes without breaking the skin, let it be cauterized as we have mentioned in treating an abscess with hot plasters.
de la brisure dou pis	And for the broken leg.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The leg is never broken in the middle but often near the end; and when it is broken in the middle, it descends below, causing great pain to the patient, loss of strength, and swelling, sometimes vomiting blood, and opening up joints in the fractured bone, which hurts terribly.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is that the patient lies on their back, places a pillow between their shoulder blades, then presses the shoulders and brings together the two ribs with hands, adjusting them gently in all possible ways until they appear as they should; then place splints and stuffings above the fracture subtly with salt or another light substance, envelop it in a cloth so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its round shape at the back, strain evenly, loosen gradually each hour if necessary, and strain again; if you need to remove due to corrosion or pruritus where it is, pain, or abscess, hurry up, remove it, clean the splint, and apply in whatever ways of treatments that come to mind.
de la brisure des costes	From the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	That the break of ribs that they come with their back and forehead, and no more it is certainty, and so that they become hardened in the form.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the reductions are such that you set the fracture evenly as it should be. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is descending towards the kidneys, causing the patient great pain and numbness, as from pleurisy, for the bone has no tissue; it also causes weakness, dizziness, and vomits a large amount of blood, which is serious ill health, and the elders have applied much medicine.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it should be administered foods that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the fracture upward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not attempt what we cannot achieve; if there are no puss-filled abscesses present, they will not appear.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have appeared, then apply the treatment.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that one should apply pads on the area to absorb moisture and it makes sense; however, there is concern that the pads may attract excess fluids to the weakened area due to their placement.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	; by a.stir ou the set a. ndest; they haved and# s but that t1 this if you. They are they be sume que laye- that isnt en seie est conti;
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the broken bone, causing doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision at the location of the fractured rib, and one must place under .i. instrument for warding off the syphilitic; afterwards, you should cut the bone, gently extract, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with emplasters until healed. And if abscesses come up, put them on moistened linen cloths in oil roseate, and place at the location; care for it as needed so that it lies flush with the chest or where it should be, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the broken rib fracture
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a breaking of the bone in the ribs, and rarely does it occur that they bow; similarly with the spinal column of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	When such a thing happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when pricked with a needle, do not feel it. Know that in some cases it is fatal, but if they can move and feel well when strained and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if one puts care into it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and whether there is an accident that involves hands, and on top of the back swells with windwaste and involuntary evacuation; and when it is felt above his belly, swells with involuntamoinal evacuation. And when it is felt on his back and he wants to sit up, cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then it is a less serious matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is to apply if there is an abscess heat, place rosemary or olive oil on the spine until it is eased; then place one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with a cloth; remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, stitching it closed if large, apply an embalming ointment until healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, called "the skull's corner," use your left hand to grasp it, and hold equal with your right hand at will, then place a poultice and bandage, as needed; strain it, and if there are other dislocated bones, fix them, remove them, treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For breaking of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is no slight reduction at the head; they cause a long deformity, descend to the pubic bone, come with pain to the place where they are located, and swell as though broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the break; and discern which bones are broken and their alignment; and if the fracture is solely at the head, then adjust to make the break even, so it may become natural again.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it descends to the pubic bone, then place the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of this fracture can be properly set.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it evenly, place on the plaster, then put a wooden or metal pole underneath, and hold the breakage so that it does not move; and mend the location from above the ribs until they are aligned again.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and hold as needed (without causing any further harm). And that is how it's done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	From the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is what lies between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if broken, it must be repaired according to one of the two ways: the first way being that you take a piece of ivory shaft. In this manner:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And take two pieces of wood as ligatures and tie them on top, then hold the patient above one piece; then pour some boiling oil onto the broken bone until it reaches the joint, and have a wooden arch in the middle, then place the fracture at an equal distance from both hands together; then you must mend the break so that it returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one suspends the patient on his hatterail, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers so that one washes the part above the wound with their hands, and the other washes below from top to bottom, stretching each towards its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too far out, tie a ligature below the wound and above it, and stretch each minister towards their part. And if the wound is close to the shoulder blade's neck, one should place a ligature midway between the upper arm bone and another near the elbow, below the wound; and similarly, if the wound faces toward the elbow, it requires placing a light ligature without strain until the wound heals evenly above its location, and towards the elbow; then align the wound as necessary, remove the ligatures if there are no abscesses.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess does arise, do not strain it until at least six days have passed; apply a moistened bandage with oil of roses as long as the abscess is soothed; then remove the ligatures and the method of extraction is to place the empyema over the wound, assemble the arm above the shoulder joint, put your hand on the shoulder or chest; and apply a dressing, strain it against the joint and the arm until the arm is in its proper position unless any impediment prevents this, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you suspect the bone does not move, use splints and place a wider and stronger splint than the others over the fracture, with two spaces between each splint; then make sure each splint is large enough to extend beyond the break by three fingerbreadths on either side; then press down on the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on treating a fracture, stronger and less frequently.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of splints and pressure as we have said, when you restore the broken limb in the hour that is mentioned, and doubt that a hot abscess occurs, leave it tied until the seventh day as we have said; then check every three days to ensure no inflammation or swelling comes to the place where veins cannot form due to excessive length. If so, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such events occur, do not loosen the bandages for more than three or more days and let the patient rest on his back, with his hands over his stomach; and place a pad of equal thickness under the shoulder, and check every hour during the day or night that the appearance of the broken limb does not move or become softened by the ligatures; if so by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food we have set forth meat, in such a way that the flesh is tender; and when it begins to resume, let it be fat. And it is customary that the shoulder and limb must loosen bandages and administer baths and ointments for medicines of balsamum oil for the place pour mucidus. Et se les poils, si li estraint; et le jorz a li doit de laverent il ypunselet, adalent et le plas eveillee enxenil dant leu.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one small and attached to the forearm, and the other large and located above the elbow; sometimes only the large foscile is broken or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bone is broken, recovery and healing are easy, but when the large bebone is broken, sanation is poor and more painful than if both were broken together; if only the small bone is broken, it should be extended slightly gently and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	by conttous it t (s; that themaire ]. Bon bon que en sone’doules; but also un they.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there is a break into pieces, put each piece back in its place; and if any are displaced that they prick the edge, do not attempt to restore them to their place, but instead make an incision by it as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a break with a wound, discuss this particular case with the surgeon; then proceed with treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of restoration pus-filled sores appear, take a bandage made of oil balm and white wax; ensure it is neither too hard nor too soft. Wrap each sore subtly until they are calmed. Then remove the bandage, and apply an ointment powder with plenty of egg yolk, then place the stitches over the break, ensuring these are stronger and slightly wider than others; remember that there should be seven or more stitches depending on the situation: whether the fracture is in one bone or two. Tighten them more above the fracture compared to other parts, and each day bring it closer together as we have said at the beginning of this chapter; ensure the bandages are soft and moist, not hard or rough. Use linen threads for stitching, neither too thick nor too thin as we have mentioned. And after some days, treat both limb and ligaments.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	If any accident befalls the limb, as itching that comes to a limb, you must wash the member with warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not rest too tightly. And then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone released, proceed accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too tightened, you must soften it a bit and let it be so for some time until sensation returns, then strain again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have mentioned come to the patient, then let him sleep until xx days have passed or so; and place his hands on his neck, making sure both sides are equal, and be careful of movement and digestion, and he sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or xxxv., and possibly in xx days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the properties.
de la brisure de la main	of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	That at the back of the hand and on the forearm occur few fractures, and there come only frequent bends many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the foot or the forearm is fractured or bent, it must be that the patient cries out in pain, and lies directly opposite him evenly; then place his hand under the extended toe, and lengthen the ministers to align the broken bones, and set them level as they should properly join; apply a plaster and wadding if there is no abscess, then put an ointment according to the amount at the site; and wrap it in one linen drape.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is near the wisdom tooth inside the belly of the sole, make a splint from cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their broken plant; then strengthen with a long bandage, ensuring its support is as large as the palm's breadth and apply the pressure accordingly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is in the foot, it is necessary to place a splint underneath and another one on top of the sole, so that the hands are kept open and straight; then wrap around entirely with bandages, ensuring the ties secure the joints between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture occurs in any of our joints and it's a dislocation, place them evenly as needed; and reinforce with bandages, and if you see fit to insert a small straight splint to elevate the displacement without movement; and if the fracture is like that of the index or other fingers, place them evenly, and secure with the healthy joint that follows; or bind all together in one holding, allowing some slight motion or use a splint as needed; and be mindful during recovery and placement of abscesses, and address what arises as I have described.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh bone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken in many places, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration involves placing a splint on either side of the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies face downwards, then each servant extends their hands equally on his side; and this is when the break occurs within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be towards the palm, and the other ligaments below the fracture. Likewise, if it's close to the groin, then place the ligaments by the groin, and perform a traction; then you should set the bone equally with both hands as much as possible in its natural shape, and then apply a splint, unless an abscess appears.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a pus outbreak, let it be soothed first, then return to your work and care; the fracture is treated in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap above the fracture with a double layer of two or three bands; leave any excess material hanging out, then turn the leg so that the ankle reaches the root of the knee, and place a long thread between the hip and the leg below the groin, with its head on top of the filament; then turn above the leg and above the hip with the bandage, and place a splint underneath the fracture; then apply leather straps to ensure even tension, and begin fastening four or five turns (or six) below the fracture; as you move further from the fracture, less tighten it. Then go back up to the two legs of thread that you placed between the leg and hip, and place three splints on top, until you reach the knee; and then untie it so that no pus or swelling occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it occurs and is dislocated as described earlier many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are caught, one must reduce them accordingly; and if they cannot be reduced, then the cavity must be split open, and a wire pulled through; and treat it as we have said until healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	At no time is the thigh broken as when putting in place splints on a shoulder and arm; however, with this type of repair, it does not alleviate all the patient's suffering.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, more or less, depending on the different temperaments of individuals.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the groove of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	It is known that in the groove of the knee joint, there are few breaks but many folds. And if it breaks, it's not just a crack or piercing, and comes to all wounds, feels like a wound, and this smells very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that you put equal pressure on both sides of its legs, as much as it can move; then place the splint, and if needed, round an upright rod, and restrain it as required, then address all other injuries we have mentioned elsewhere like abscesses, which are hot and similar; you give to each accident what is due, until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	s
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	It is known that in the leg there are two bones: one is called "mustelz" by right and the other is called "foscile"; both suffer fractures as they do in the arm, and thus the restoration is done similarly to that of the arm, with all treatments being the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from every part.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the smaller bone is fractured, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	When the large bone is broken, it feels great pain and one can see it well; then return to its position. Then make an extension, align it evenly, and fasten the splints equally; however, it must be ensured that the breakage is not ugly, and if there are many pieces, the extensions should be minor and lighter; proceed according to your judgment.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your procedure, take two strips of hooped wood that measure the length of the leg on both sides, from the heel to above; then wrap each side with a bandage once and again tie them together in the middle, so the leg cannot incline to either right or left, and thus it is well. None should administer any other movement to the leg while made of wood, and properly place it for protection against movement at the break site where there is injury; move each day the leg to see if there are any bleeding wounds or other accidents; cure until it becomes healthy again.
de la brisure des os dou piet	On the fracture of the bone in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle there comes no breakage, but to the bone of the foot there is never any breakage and to the joints little occurs except strain in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breakage to the bone of the foot, and you see these bones protruding from one another, place it on hard ground as though it were going to walk; then put your foot underneath its own, where the bones are elevated, and press until they return to their original positions. Then apply a splint and stuff inside, and place a small tablet of .ij. (two) pointed ends beneath the belly of the injured foot, then strain it back into position, and once you have wrapped bandages around it, along with other necessary things.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you shall remove the ligature, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any broken bones, restore them as we have described for the hand's bones; then measure a stake according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place beneath the foot the tableau I mentioned, and hold steadily; if there are two or three or more, break each bone and apply a stake according to its amount, wrapped in one linen cloth, and fasten the tableau under the foot; so that they be aligned with the abdomen above the leg's head.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget other things I have mentioned for other fractures, as we have said; and treat each injury as appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For the fracture of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's natural form is broken, she should sit upright and widen her stance, then lean towards her back slightly, held from behind; then fill her vagina with cotton, inserting as much as one piece of cloth; then have her stand up, and slowly lift her buttocks in stages, until the cotton slips into the entrance of her nature (vagina), restoring bone alignment with the insertion. When she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once done, let it return; by doing this for seven days or so, the fracture will be healed. If you wish to ensure success, take a pouch made from sheep's bladeroften tied at one end with stringand fill it completely with urine: blow air through the nozzle until the bladder is empty; her nature will then restore itself. Then have her vagina filled with cotton and left as such for several days, until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of a man's or woman's finger is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip joint; these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who apply diligence and use this book. For fractures indicate various approaches to the right path of restoration: therefore, so be it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the frotteur of les cure, qui orses, and it la gue: a l’in brisures est pas li soignee du. Et si d’et de le retenir en, quant jors et de les jors, que pour une le s’a mordret; puis pire n'il ne croient.
de brisure avec plaie	Of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those who have a break with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be examined now so that the signs we have mentioned confirm them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, if there remains lead poisoning, unless you have something else, then continue to restore the break in that same hour or day if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	t he:cordon ; c;t, they can be le se leso's the mele tre la anguille as de ust; please; do not d.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and appears at the edge revealed, it must be placed carefully with your hands in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable to place evenly with your hands, use this instrument made of iron, which has six or eight claws long, and its width according to the amount of the wound; thus, it is necessary for the master that he grasps three or four, depending on what is needed in each fracture treatment; let it be round and slightly thick, so it does not bend under pressure on the limb at your work, and placed firmly before, with a bulkier part ahead:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	It is called "palainche" because it requires the curved head of the bone to be placed on the apparent part; and turned once until it returns, making them even against eachader. And if the fracture is subtle, and the extensions cannot well grasp the bone, then you must shave off the top of the bone so that the extensions have access.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then use the cup of an appropriate instrument, either incising or sawing, if possible; then remove whatever is lodged in the bone with roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, understand that it may not be in its natural place. If you can make it so that it is in its natural place, then moisten a piece of cloth with vinegar-based black ointment properly; and do not put anything like pitch or other substances on the wound, lest it cause decay and corruption; then provide appropriate dressings after restoring the bnne, leaving the wound uncovered, applying covering all around according to the size of the wain, ensuring that the strain is not applied with the fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, causing death or decay in some cases; thus the pressure should be gentler and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that there may be some other occurrence, as we have said, feeling pain at the place, do not put dressings; but wrap around in place of a dressing with durable cloths, and secure them. And when after one day or two days you see any pus coming from the wound, remove whatever you had placed on it all along with vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds as if an ointamoin tetrafarmacistical and similar to that.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is relaxed and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is proper that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the bow is bent slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if more than one day passes, and it cannot heal but remains bent, as there are small fragments of bone, so you must clean the wound with lint, and extract all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	byllde the t
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises coming over the shoulder blade
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often occur after the healing of the dislocation, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant sight is to see the condition of the limb; and by chance, it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the wound is fresh: If you administer stipulative medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, frankincense, and similar substances, or any of these alone or in combination, mix them with astringent wine or vinegar-water or egg white; and place the mixture in an infusion bag and squeeze it well without untying the knots daily; then dislocate it again and repeat this with another piece until inflammamoins have subsided. Or strain on a nicely made plaster as its properties are such that it draws all swelling off the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness just like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so do at the top of the bandage, cutting away any excess, then take it to an experienced razor until it has disappeared.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which becomes weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and remains weak and delicate: for various reasons - one being that it was bound too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many ligatures, preventing proper circulation to the limb; or due to a multitude of bleedings; or from excessive movements at inappropriate times; or because it has little blood within its body, thus becoming weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you should encourage the patient to eat well and keep their body supple until blood has multiplied within them; give them baths and bring them joy and comfort; then apply poultices to the member, so as to attract significant nourishment, and frequently bathe it with warm water until nutrition reaches the limb again; and it returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After the healing of an injured limb, a member becomes twisted
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	After an injured limb has healed and the bone is broken openly, and the form of the limb is ugly, but it still retains its natural shape: do not believe the madmen who say that you must break off a new member entirely, as many have done so on our land; such practices are blameworthy, leading to great evils and sometimes death. However, if the swelling and twisting are fresh, then it is necessary to raise them with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked, like meadowsweet leaves, roots, and comfrey, etc.; and make a medicinal poultice like good diaquilon, and take musk of meadowsweet, and confit with pig fat or oil from sesame seeds, then apply the poultice; or take oily figs and grind them with barley bran, and similar remedies that weaken tightness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And never is the knotting of bones addressed by continuous and prolonged friction with wet hands. And be sure to move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	If the twisted and hardened condition is similar to that of stone, it needs to be removed with iron, if necessary, cut down to the bone using a delicate saw-like tool; then apply poultice and careful treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This is the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, it must now be gently moved back to its place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if you delay, and the leg swells, and perhaps it is difficult to set back in place; therefore, do not move it until the hour when it is swollen: often this brings about inflammeback and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Also, when this happens, make the patient lie down, until the swelling is calmed; then bathe the member with warm water and oil, then gently flex it, and treat each limb as required by its condition.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	f Armf: TI; ça;
des mandibules	Of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes jawbones become dislocated outwardly, and the type of dislocation is in two ways: either they are slightly misplaced from their positions, becoming somewhat loose; or they are completely displaced, hanging towards one side, causing saliva from the mouth that cannot be held and preventing closure of the mouth and wrapping around the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When dislocation is small, it may return to various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	d thecks that he-do so M� market.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a manner that the minister dries the patient's head, and inserts the mirror slightly from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth; if the dislocation is of two parts; and let the other hand be ready to place it equally; and instruct the patient to soften their mandibles, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And places the mirror evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	: and it de li m eues mete tu me c, a l’ovraie le chevres tu les teu, et en lieu la m as se, ens du d. Et the chestroma s’en; Et rampin the est dislocation, se coum de les gue:
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned equally, and the wound of the patient is well closed up, then place on it a cloth made of a mixture in a vessel of oil and wax, and lightly bind with soft threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not move to either side or strain at all, but gently eat tender meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws are well nourished.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then he may eat what he wishes lightly, without opening his mouth while eating or drinking until the jaws are well nourished and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	When the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not returned to their places, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal perforation, and sometimes they may expel their contents entirely.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then say that it is a deadly condition; and many times the one who suffers from it dies within seven days.
de la forcelle	Of the forehead or frontal bone.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The powerful ones cannot dislocate within the ribcage from its continuity to the pelvis, and it is never dislocated once properly aligned; indeed this is felt by him.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then press firmly with your palm at its place, and it will return; then place under the plaster and bandage it, and secure.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the knee which is towards the thigh cannot dislocate; if not possible, and if it dislocates once again, place it back in its location as we have said; then place under plaster and bandage it securely, and advise the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Li membieres et les os est desavisez par le movement qui avient quoi puisse ains que il ne teste puisque demorer; mais si li est grandement malsain, se doit cauteriser avec saindsont li est ; mais s’est :
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	That one must know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one where it dislocates from the lower part of the arm to above; and the second occurs at the upper part; and occasionally above, but this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it does not dislocate backwards from the shoulder, nor internally with the nerves; and sometimes dislocates upwards towards the arm, especially in those who have little flesh, as for them it happens quickly; while for those with enough flesh, it moves slightly, and returns easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there are individuals who experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, thinking it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you test it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that with dislocation when it descends towards the socket, and there is a distinction between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their marked difference.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the socket to where the top of the shoulder reaches, as if it were some eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	by the t grifen se la man thompledesta a l's
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this manner of dislocation is not merely to return it when new or if the child is unwell.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the patient upward, then remove his shoes from under the seat and raise the joint forcefully into place at that spot; the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, so he can put them back on, which will happen quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	les.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then place the cloths on the patient's back and put a strip of linen around his shoulder, not too weak nor too hard, then position the straps on the talus under the strip, lift the head of the dislocated shoulder carefully, and treat the injured hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and other remedies treat the injured hand's head, so it does not move forward; that shoulder is returned immediately, and observe if resetting follows this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And make sure a taller person is present; and they stand facing the patient's side, and place their shoulder undernee
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other remedies rub the hand below for the patient towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh down with something heavy, and the dislocation now returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the resetting is done in another way: by sticking a long iron rod into the ground so that the shoulder resembles an arrow shaft and is neither too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is placed under the patient's head but with sheets beneath them, and the shoulder remains long as the rod. After that, their hand is stretched to the opposite side properly, so the joint will return to its place promptly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Et s'il ne veut pas retourner pour toutes les raisons que nous avons dites, alors faites cette cure : prenez un tison de deux bras de grand et quatre doigts de large, qui ait le chef rond afin qu'il puisse entrer au milieu du côté de l’épaule, selon la forme suivante :
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Ensuite, enveloppez le haut de la fistule avec une toile mouillée afin qu'elle ne blesse pas le patient, puis placez-la sous l’épaule du malade ; étendu ses bras sur le long fust (tison), fixez l’ajutoire sur le fust et le bras vers la tête de la main. Puis mettez le bras au-dessus d’un écran large, tenez les mains à l'aval et laissez le corps pendu dans l'autre direction : assurez que la jointure est maintenant correctement positionnée.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Et quand elle est ainsi, quelle qu'en soit la manière, si il convient de placer sous l’épaule une spere (tison) d'uneine égale ; puis appliquez la plâtrer à poudre fine sur toute l’épaule et autour, avec encens et aubun d'uef; rétablissez immédiatamenr le lien au-dessus de la plâtré et embrassez la main à son cou, les mains reposant ainsi.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you move little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; then gradually increase movement after 5 or 6 days, and move it; if it is firmly set and not softened, it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cautery treatments as previously instructed in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do everything as instructed and it remains dislocated after 6 days, and the joint cannot hold or lift its arm upwards, then understand that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut off or stretched out or softened; and understand that the joint will never be firmly placed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation located towards the leg and buttocks is made by impact, extension of hands, and another instrument; treat until it becomes healthy again.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and later weakness in movement, many times the patient must use it until the stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	In cases of double dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by points and returns to them; when it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, the dislocation cannot be reset because one can clearly see and feel it, and it dislocates according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated elbow with its counterpart, if it is clearly visible to you. For the joint is raised, and cannot bend or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as an abscess appears, because if the abscesses come, then repositioning would be painful; and perhaps not all can be reset in total, especially when they are behind; this type of dislocation is worse than others, causing more pain, and possibly leading to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	The restoration is when it can be returned to its place by extending the hand to your two hands; and spread out his arms, and turn the hands downwards according to the cord around, forward and backward, joining the joint with his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back as he doubles his hand with his hand, and bends at the root of the palm cord that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, you must do strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and tie the wrist with a bandage so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm in each direction, then wrap a long and wide double cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	When the muscles to the joint have reached their joining, then oil it with any oil to soften the joint, and then reset the joint properly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, then apply dry dust with egg yolk, and reset the fracture properly, and support the arm against the neck of the patient, leave for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly in its place, then dislocate it and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold tightly, repeat the splinting and tying, leaving it like this for several days, until it is securely set; then dislocate it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	If it feels instability after the reset of the joint, and if it moves again, then bathe it well and rub gently, pressing until soothed; place a fat sheep wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then wrap it, and give it another bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, rub the joint gently at first, then replace the sheep wool, and give another bath; do this two or three times until healed; if you see that, put moist wheat flour heated with butter on it, and wrap around. It will return to its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	The displacement of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The displacement of the hand joint occurs, and its return is easy compared to other joints; thus it must be promptly returned to its place within the same hour as it dislocates, ensuring that any swelling subsides or abscesses cease.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the method of returning it is to place the affected hand on a table and extend its members; then the physician aligns them equally, placing their palm over the dislocation site, applying pressure until realignment occurs.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	the eye ones.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the healer places their hand under that joint appearance. If it returns now, this is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, strain from calming abscesses with leeches, and let them do so again to start anew.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot be borne, and you are unable to place it back in its proper position after any number of days, the misaligned joint persists.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and it does not allow the patient any movement until their hands are thoroughly weakened, and they cannot grip anything at all; then understand that the nerves or vessels are cut, so there is no other remedy than to grasp with fire near the wound, which may sometimes prove ineffective.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at rest, place it on the plaster we have mentioned, then stretch and leave for 5 days, then release and let be like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no weakness, then apply hot water poultice, and rub until clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the hands' joints
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never are dislocated the hands' joints on either side, never at the back or front of the palm;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	to mainsides are of the les dous jours au dose soit est du est de parfue sont li sont les tairements dism. ould les mainte est l’ostrum of s quesle, et le part le la isntest on doux a cimez est ou sont de li couche, and then the oint are to est que ils mains: and, and, dose les cheques parolee.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	Leave it for two days, and then set it level on that day; and if it is not improved, as we have said, dislocate it again the next day, and allow movement, but restrain it at night; do this often, until it becomes tight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Do the same for if it is dislocated in the hand's stomach area, and do as you have done before, until it becomes straightened; similarly do this when it is displaced from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Pain relief of the lumbar region of the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are many dislocations, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the expulsions occur suddenly without warning, and they cannot be held in place, causing many times to soften a limb or one of the hips, or both arms or legs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times it moves in four parts; when the lower part moves, it is called "gilbocineta" (a term possibly referring to hollowing out):
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you must reset it if lymphangitis has occurred from infancy: there should be no healing or health in the end.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things say the old ways of healing with many words, for there is not much gain in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated according to my intention and have formed extracts in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	t (cheste con grand: the ben triguissent ete main 1: Mx esttill'com se cequately line f the
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also those that come directly to two sides, which cannot be cured without addressing the one specifically that comes along the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient should be stretched on his back evenly in one place, and have support underneath him, so he does not arch.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a bundle of straw under the head firmly on the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage above the joints of the patient, and one for the hips, and for the knees, and for the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other on the feet, among the two inflamed areas;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, the inflamed area as we have said, and the healer places his palms along the spine lengthwise until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	the that the.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And place the mirrors of his fingers on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see that this happens with a twist towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you insert two spits at the head of the arm on one side and towards the fingers of the other two, and between each spit, have a space about as long as a palm.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And each spit should have a peg where the twist turns correctly and be firmly fixed in the ground so that it does not move; and between each pair of spits there should be another spit turning, against which the ligaments turn, and two small spits about as long as a palm for turning the twist.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then wrap the ligament that is among the sinews at the neck toward the head, and the other ligament toward the fingers at the other end, with each assistant turning their torque to all of the ligament, and the master aligns the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, place a desiccating poultice with plenty of egg yolk, and then the plasters, and then an insole from a tablet of .iii. ounces long, that points to the source of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine; then apply a ligament as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient until it is well again;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if at the end of healthiness, it is necessary to administer soothing and alleviating medicines, with the insole that we have said before; and never once shall I administer a piece of lead.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	At times it appears in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone breaking, which means one should not have any assumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	He says that the dislocations of the hip and shoulder joints come from force only, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind; more inside than outwards, and less in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of his dislocation is such that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer and opens more on the diseased knee joint than the healthy, and he cannot double the painful knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And there is the leg that is near an inflamed abscess, because the shoulder of the thigh comes to it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who come at disadvantage, so these accidents are contrary to what was mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those in front are that their legs are well aligned with completion; however, do not double the pain in the knee, and if you wish to make them walk, they cannot before, and hold back urine, and swell the vein, and as it walks, passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those behind are that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the vein is softened, and the head of the hip to below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The signs of this type of dislocation are that you recognize if the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment; and one must not have any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	When the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating, quickly return the joint to its place, press it inward and outward, and move it right and left; perhaps it will return on its own, requiring no further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, you must enlist the help of a strong assistant and support the leg firmly with two hands or with a strap under the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another assistant extends their hand over the thigh so they can place their hands on either side of the calf, then gently pull with a strap around the buttocks; while another holds the head with the strap.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend above and below all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at once, and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, it requires attention to the corresponding case. When dislocation is of the jaw, you should bind the patient on their healthy side, then tie the ligature at the base of the hip and where the bone protrudes, extending the ligament upward toward the angle, and towards the femur;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then engage other ministers with your arms and embrace the large groin of the affected thigh, extending it forward completely; now it will return to its place immediately; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then you must bind both feet of the affected side together with a strong soft bandage around both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang from the head of a stick and let two arms be extended; then command one minister to embrace the top of the groin, and have another ministers hanging with the patient, who fully embraces the groin, because the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	When the dislocation is on the underside, apply to the patient, as we have said in those with gilbosity, and properly tie a ligature above the affected leg, and above the foot similarly.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two fires, one at the top and another below, then insert a fire between the thighs above the affected area in the patient's middle.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place wet cloths around it, so that they do not bother the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and he who performs surgery places his hand equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. But if not, place on a table and press as we have described in the dislocation section, lying the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended with haste, and as I have said; place your hand on their painful side, then press with the other hand, extending towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it should not be extended downward or lifted upwards, but rather as if his heel was dislocated in that direction, as we have mentioned regarding lying on one's side with both knees bent.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it lies on its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and one must place their hand upon the joint against the bone.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And it will be ready when the patient extends their legs and they are even; then bring the buttocks together, place a splint, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And it rests for three or four days before the splint is removed, and a splint is placed again; and if you see that they are even, then bind as before, and leave it for three days; then remove the splint, and allow them to walk gently until the member is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: it can be displaced upwards and downwards, and behind; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs if you command that he instructs the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not dislocate; for healing.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is so that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back to his face, and place your foot under yours.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his thigh in your palms and retract between your thumbs, then bend the two ribs of the thigh completely; other ministers extend his foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign that it is correct when he can slightly feel his leg against his hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the poultice on it and raise the leg against the hip joints at once for three or four days, then untie it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is well supported.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not at all, it must be firmly extended as we have said in the treatment of the elbow, until it is set right.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocations
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never fully bent or unbent and within them lie the arteries.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	there s:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	If dislocations are slight, it must be gently extended to its hands when barely touched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, one must make the patient sit upright and support with a stool by placing it under their leg just above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then turn the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice to the left side; then extend it upwards gently and place the foot back in its normal position.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	s e est pa (tirke t.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	If it cannot return thusly, make the patient lie on their back on the ground with a firm support placed between their thighs and wrap a cloth around them so they do not move.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then dye the minister's thigh and have another minister extend the feet with hands or straps, so they are tied to the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and the support should remain between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then correct the displacement so it is even again with your hands, and use other methods to tie off the healthy leg below, and the displacement will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it reaches a point, apply the plaster and insert stitches above, firmly tighten them, and tie off the thread to the leg, and protect the veins that are behind the ankle, so that the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, re-tighten them; then remove on the third day or fourth, and advise the patient to walk by four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes beyond this boundary, it is not secure that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
des dois	:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be extended without much effort, which is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of your lower back or foot bones, it must be done that you make the patient sit on something flat or a table standing upright, and place your foot under where these joints are affected, then press firmly with your foot until they realign.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is aligned properly, and nothing appears to be out of place, then under the sole of your foot put a table on two fingers, press firmly, and leave for three days, then remove it; and let him rest until he is well again.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound occurs with a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not wise in the treatment, unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it extenspertly, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to action; then do not be rash.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	by the in a lame et bon they ougte:
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	When you see hope, reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscess may heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, apply soothing substances to the abscess immediately, and treat the wound as needed with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is a dislocation and broken bones need to be addressed, do so with small pieces of wood or horn as we have discussed for simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	mar:e the. ça; est l'sticy le ben sonttre, also tu cont� s: th's bon g ne ce ou le quill that. The short
Explicit le romen de fisique	The explicit rules of anatomy are revealed
