O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science together with its filling, and I have finished it through explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete this treatise with the subject of 'surgery', which is part of the work of hands.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has been adopted throughout all places, it is therefore a complete science and widely spread, with only minor details left from ancient books describing surgeries performed by skilled hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the mistake and folly, and understanding is closed off, and knowledge is misplaced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I must revitalize this treatise with the arrangement of its teachings according to the method of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and together with the forms of surgical instruments and other aids of craftwork, along with preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the person attending to elevate themselves in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they understand the judgment of members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of veins, and the movement and moving vessels and resting vessels, and at the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Hippocrates says that without a tool is much more difficult, and with the hand is little; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not mindful of what has been mentioned, should be careful to avoid error and causing harm; thus I have often seen many from those who engage in this science abandoning knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a mad surgeon who made an incision on the abscess of a scrofulous swelling or neck of a woman, and cut her arteries there; hence so much blood came out that the woman bled to death in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a piece of the bladder itself, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been summoned to treat him, and I saw the condition of the sick person and the size of the stone, and it was certain that he would die as they cut into it.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	This other wise woman took care of the duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the fracture was an open wound; and due to the healer's ignorance, the fracture was set on top of the wound by forceful means without using a splint, and left no bandage at all for the wound. So it ended up like this: she instructed him not to dislocate it again; and it remained thus until his leg fully healed with the foot also improving but ultimately leading to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called upon to come to him, and I hurriedly dislocate his leg; and when it was dislocated again, he found peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the contagion had already taken hold of his limb and couldn't be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire limb was utterly lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see a certain physician who fells an incrustation of an abscess, which then becomes inflamed due to the spite of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an ulcer, when it is filled with black bile humor, does not require that you touch it with iron unless it can be partly lifted so all the corruption may be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And so, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, places where there are dangers in multiple conditions; and I will show in each section of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	It is why you must take care of yourself so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in thoughtfulness, and address your troubles firmly yet gently, using the best method so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised; let go of the hopeful diseases causing grave health issues, remove your weapons of doubt, and have faith within yourself so that you may transition from this world to another one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien in some of his warnings says: "Do not take careless illnesses to heart, that you may be called foolish by the wise."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauldrons and medicine boils, and it consists of chapters organized from the head to the feet; and forms of strumens, and iron implements for cauldrons, and everything necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about tailoring and cutting, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it consists of chapters organized in accordance with the forms of strumens.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar matters; and it orders from the neck down to fingers, and shaping of extremities.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So that we remember the work, it is necessary to describe the nature of help and the harm from each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are longer words, subtle science, and hidden answers; and on this many wise men have spoken, agreeing with it; but their words suffice not to me because I return to brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps in all constitutions where there is matter; for two types of constitutions exist: one hot lacking matter, and the other dry lacking matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In constitutions that are both hot and dry lacking matter, some say fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others claim the opposite: that fire cautery is only useful for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated for heat-related illnesses with more heat or drying out; however, those who argue otherwise say that fire cautery greatly assists in treating diseases that are both hot and dry within the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body and its moisture with respect to hot temperament, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	est a quo: CLEt le t-B the mot s that les que pas.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my child, that fire cautery combines the secret arts of healing and brings greater mercy than incendiary medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	And do not worry this member is it comes to the body of fire.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning remedies come from moving one member to another, bringing severe illnesses to the affected limb; and sometimes it kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The heat for its high value and due to the goodness of its substance does not act unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experimentation and long service in the field, as well as my studies, regarding the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the length of words, because it does not please me to keep you from the secret that lies within fire or work, and the quality of craftsmanship, how it deals with bodily diseases, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration; accept this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, son, that they agree on when cauterizations should be made, and the prayerful seekers choose them.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all cases, because the harm occurring can be removed by the aid of cauterization; especially if the cauterization is for urgent and severe pains that cannot wait until greater evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	bye t’s cide of f lits are c (t; est a re and to say the paindust prist:
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the thing that can happen is that illness may come any time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and excesses are assembled in him from the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at their source where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar issues, so that no great pain returns; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that caustics have value after medicine, their understanding is false, and caustics are the last of medicine because when we administer treatment methods in any illness and they prove to be valueless, then we administer our caustic, and it has value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then properly speaking, caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that surgical instruments made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not consider them inferior solecuite due to the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the wounds from a cautery do not decay but heal faster, indeed I have tested this, finding it true in some men; and gold instruments are as effective as those made of iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the instrument made of gold, it does not remain hot simply due to the color of gold and cools quickly; and if overheated, it catches fire; therefore there is ample hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cautery because it has proven effective in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	About the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are for moisture and coldness in the brain; there you do by reason of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head into the eyes, and to a multitude of dreams and pain in teeth and throat, as well as all diseases coming from coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	cride.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then have the patient sit with a cross between their hands, and place their hands over his thighs; afterwards put the root of your palm above the root of his neck between both elbebows; and wherever come your two arms, let it bleed before using the cautery called "olivare," which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then place your hand on the injured area with ink, and draw and stretch it slightly by turning the arm bit by bit; then lift your hand gently, and observe if you see a small piece of bone; and if you do not see it, continue cauterizing until you can see the bone as I have instructed; afterwards take some sealing wax, and place soft cotton within, and position on the affected area for three days; then apply fine linen soaked in oil; leave until the burn is healed; afterward treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if said by elders that the more openly the wound remains, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, help it heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must grind the fire cautery so a part of the bone is burned away, and then reset what has been burned from the bone, and treat it accordingly.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others say that one must grind the fire cautery extensively, and push hard enough to flatten the bone as wide as the woolen cloth women put in their hair for moving fluids; and the wound should be ground open for a long time beforehand; afterwards, it should be cleaned and dressed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	These two methods of fire cauterization do not seem to me good in all cases, rather than in some men who have a way out of fear; and I think it seems wise that I should leave them alone; for the head weakens by continuous natural solutions as we testify from other limbs; similarly when the head of an unhealthy person is naturally weakened, and the first sign of fire cauterization is more healing and beneficial to me, so with such cases my work is thus equally salutary.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of great pain from a toothache at the back of the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When pain occurs throughout the head and lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; if one performs the cautery we have mentioned before, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be mindful if the patient's headache is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery we have mentioned above just slightly.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	s (a.
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the illness extends to the entire body, and the head is purged with mildly laxative medicines, along with other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases, yet none helps: then you shall perform fire cautery as per two ways, that is, using aqueous medicine and pitch.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery using aqueous medicine involves making an incision of about half an inch, removing the surface and covering it with two small pieces of lead, then placing the temple where the pain occurs so that you can replace the alum paste under the skin; and once placed, leave it tightly secured for twelve hours. Then loosen and treat the wound for either three or four days, then apply a poultice made of cotton soaked in butter until suppuration ceases.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is healthy again; and if you see, prepare a batch of certain burning remedeburning medicines that I have written or designated to treat with burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is made as follows. Heat the cautery of this kind, where its shape lies:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called 'close' because the head is shaped like a bell or has .i. protruding part, and there is a small opening; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently turn the feir slightly until half of its edge looks charred; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which runs forward, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter, and afterwards treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellaris," do so at the tip, and be careful not to puncture an artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you are treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in sections of diseases and it doesn't help or the medicine and iron implement do not suffice, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellaris" until it is white; and so place your hand a line of half an hour long on the aching area, remove your hand once, and stretch enough to not puncture the artery or reach up to the bone; beware of the jaw that moves when chewing, and ensure that the nerves have no regard for it and spasms do not come upon the patient, and beware of blood flow issues from the artery once it is capped, or if there's fear of excessive bleeding and to those who are unaware and untested; leave the wound in its current state. But I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery has been capped, and I will show you where to do this on-site in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that these cauteries do not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the caustic remedy or lithotomy extractor with the caustic that has two knives; this caustic is better than the others.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From pain of the ears due to coldness.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and you have used soluble medicines and other remedies as we have described in that division, and the pains do not subside, then use this caustic called "point", of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing around the ear, where both sides hold pain equally and you move away slightly from the root of the ear once you have secured its position; and do so at six points around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	The treatment for oral affliction involves applying pressure to specific areas near the mouth, ensuring a gentle but firm touch that alleviates pain without causing further distress. This method has proven effective in managing various dental and facial conditions throughout history, reflecting the medieval understanding of bodily humors and their influence on health.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The only type of torture that should be treated with cautery is those caused by humors, as we have described in the division of diseases; and do not apply cautery to conditions resembling pus and snake venom. This instruction reflects medieval medical practices where treatments were categorized based on perceived causes like bodily fluids or external agents such as bites and stings, with each requiring specific interventions according to the prevailing humoral theory of medicine during that era.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture that causes weakness from hydromel and chief purges as well as gargling, if it is not effective, then you must caulk the patient with three cauldrons: one at the root of the ear, another a bit further back on the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cauldron in the healthy part, making the cauldrons as long as half the skin has been burnt off; this is the effect of the cauldron.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the appearance of the scalpel that we have described earlier, but it is slightly more subtle and requires the knife to be slightly larger; after treating them as I have previously stated, until they are healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is longstanding and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make four cauldrons: two on each of the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one where they are called "vessels" as we have previously stated, and the next cauldron under the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large years and medicinal pills to calm the brain; after removing all hair from the affected area, place the saffron frame on its occipital bone as written or prescribed for poultices; and here is the method of cautery: do as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is well done so, good is it; and if not, then do three cauterizations of the head descending down to the collarbone with space between each cautery being two inches apart; treat as you would the others, and if there are any obstructions, then do one cauterization in the middle; and if surgery is required, do other two on the two edges, and treat until it heals well; and let the cauteries be called "olivary" as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be scraped for years and as we have previously mentioned; after washing the head of the patient, then perform cauterization in the head and at each point, and three on the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and let it be until the skin has healed, then remove your hand; afterwards treat until healthy, and apply the cauterization called "olivare" that we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	for epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilation should not use a heated caustic except for those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to prepare the brain with various treatments that we have mentioned in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical pains.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, they are given gargles and chewing treatments to refresh the brain often with bone meats; afterward, their head is immersed in hot water, followed by one cautery as we have said before, and another on their shin, and each horn-like projection; and if patients are far gone and suffering, they undergo cauterization just as I mentioned for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine at the back and neck, using an olive oil cautery as I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child patient, they undergo a subtle cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted dampness and heavy phlegm; then one should perform the fire cautery of parts as we have told to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the excesses caused by melancholy lead to further melancholy and the body becomes weak and damp, then give them something to drink so their brains may be clarified, as per what is before in the section on divisions.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After examining the head of the patient; after making a well-made piece in the shape of a circle, place it within the head; and cross the malady, ensuring all sides are held firmly; present the poultice, and warm with aged cow's butter; heat quickly so that they can bear the heat; after removing the circle from inside the head, let it cool; do this to a patient once every week with good governance until healing occurs.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	When you see the need to cauterize, do so in several places over the entire cautery. This method of cauterization warms the skull evenly; then place a cloth soaked in butter and lamb fat upon it.
de l’awe des eulz	From under the edge of the eyelids
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyelids first become swollen as described in the division, then begin and give the patient things that purify the mind, and protect from all dampness, and let them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to return his head, and make a fire cautery in the head, and two cauldrons on top of the two temples where the nerves of the temple are together, or in one they are separate; seal up all veins and arteries that come from behind the skull; and be sure the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding too much, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making an incision for how to cauterize it; and never make a fire cautery or ligature below the two bones behind (neck).
dou cors des larmes	on les trairez et tu cuires l’origne des os et li capillons qui sont dessus, et tesulement en la coupe du corps.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears are long-standing and accustomed to the veins or near arteries that appear above the forehead; and it is seen as superfluous cold phlegmatic substances, then apply the cautery as described at the beginning of this chapter: one on the head, two on each temple, and two just below the eyes; and if more is needed, carefully cauterize a small amount above the eyebrows.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When tears flow into the body through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and if it does not help, then give a sick person three small cups of medicine; after that do a scalp cautery or oil caustic (cautery) and make two "clavilis" cauteries on each eyebrow slightly below the brow. Be careful not to injure the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the fire cautery, called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the flesh of the oil is softened by illness and dampness, then apply the paste of this fire cautery called "olivale". Here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries on the two scars as long as the eyelashes are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	theyre ;r; if: �.chief; dont (orso: soe f it s
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never does the hair of the eyelids turn to scales, and touch the eye, for which a fire cautery is made according to two methods: that of fire or burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and grown evenly, then place the patient in bed with their eyes covered so that it is like a veil of mist, and let the beginning of the sign be under the hairs; then put moist cotton mixed with egg white and musk essence over the eye, then apply this form of cautery:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the area you have marked only slightly and multiple times, let the skin be raised at that spot; and signs of the health of the wound are when you see the paper retracted, and hairs rise to the level of the oil; then clean your hands and leave it so for three days, then apply a cotton cloth greased with butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat with ointment until it becomes healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this hairs appear and the paper is softened then repeat the cautery at the same spot as before; and if hair becomes sparse, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and they are evenly distributed without touching the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization of hot medicinal fire is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a sprig of myrtle; then take French soap and freshly boiled water, each half an ounce, and grind them well together quickly so it does not cool down, then apply onto the form that you have made like a sprig of my지티슨 as the patient feels pain in one joint only, work on one at a time; and if both are similar; and put cotton cloth greased with butter underneath the joint. The patient's head is in your hand steady and place your two fingers showing over the medicine, and press gently each time that the patient feels pain from the medicine, for it causes a burning as of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, apply the appropriate medication to the wound.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling has subsided, raise the wound dressing and if you see it lifted as if raised by heat or incision, then all is well. If not, reapply medication to the wound until your efforts are equalized, and the eyes aligned; then place a cotton ball soaked in oil on the area until the scab forms, afterward treat the wound with an ointment called "dyafenis" among others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And be very careful with your efforts that the medicine does not escape from the eyes. If the dressing becomes thin afterward, and the hairs prick in the wound, restart medication on the area affected by the paper properly, as you did before; then treat it until it is healed: this is the method of a protective shield.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so should be your constraints; and do not put back on the right path one who is devoted to the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Regarding the treatment of a fistula by fire-cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not help, then it is necessary to perform fire-cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	sir the choc. What you's f: J; a med.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating the pus, and drying it out; and if it is closed, work on it, and press with a bowstring; after placing hot cautery on it properly, hold your hand to the affected area above the oil so that your hands do not go wild; place the cunture in the oil's fat, and let it rot.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the cautery up to the bone at first, that would be best. If not, restart the cautery one more time, and if necessary, leave it for three days; then apply a soft cotton ball soaked in butter, and use dry healing ointment until it is sound again, and after forty days pass when it has become sound, apply corrosive ague medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat according to what occurs in your manuscript.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of treating a fistula that the ancients did not mention. Listen to this about a fistula, and follow its length; then insert a subtle catheter with the shape mentioned herein.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they apply the amount of a ounce; and hold your hand or whatever firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the liquid flows into its place; and one must put cotton moistened with this on the affected area: if correctly placed, it will heal like from a fistula, and be cured by miraculous means.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the caustic we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer pus to the wound, and return the faster to its proper place in accordance with where it truly belongs.
des crevaices en levres	Of clefts in lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, there occur cracks in the lips called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have discussed in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small scraping cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply heated oil to those cracks until they are filled with heat; then clean the wound with lime until it is sound.
de l’aposteme de la goule	
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has turned purulent and rotten and is old and becomes a fistula; you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit: then you must apply a cautery according to the quantity of the funtile; after burning or puncturing the fistule, hold your hand until the iron cools from its heat, and thereafter; do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if treated thusly, it is good; but if not, you must expose the location and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	The slight movement of the teeth.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and this does not work, then place the head of the patient in his health; after scalding the cauterization as you come to shape that you put a ring on the tooth; and immediately put the cauterization hot, and hold your hand until the heat comes to the root of the tooth; afterwards unroll; after freeing my hand and begin again the cauterization according to your pleasure; after filling the mouth is cleaned with salt, and rinse an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And so it is that the tooth which was moving becomes fixed, with softened gums being held steady and corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of toothache pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold or heat, and the medicines do not help, then it is necessary to perform cautery in two ways: beef fat cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a vessel, and the end into a spoon of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, and the hairs in butter swell, and place on the toothache quickly; do so often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that hair and cotton are cold-buttered, place it on the aching tooth, and place an iron hot enough for the heat to reach a closure over the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Cautery of fire assembled is such that you take a vessel made of iron or silver, and large enough so that the heat does not reach to the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, after which its form will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the castery has cooled. Do this often because the pain will be relieved either on the same day or the next. And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of that cautery, and then rinse thoroughly; and that's the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a wax cautery as you wish, and according to what you can do; and that's the form of the caustic:
des scrophules	Of scrofulous swellings
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofulous swellings are due to cold humors and do not respond to medicines, then apply the fire cautery as described hereafter. Make two openings for smoke to escape from the other side of the cauterization; heat the abscess once with the cautery, or twice if necessary until it reaches the edge of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size and leave thus for three days; cover with moistened cotton dipped in butter as long as there are burns. Afterward, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moistors overcome the channels of the throat and particularly when it arises from cold complexion, then first empty the patient by using soluble medicines; afterwards apply cautery at the root of the throat, but be careful not to reach the throat itself nor burn deeply. Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine as we have the form before; treat the wound as we have previously mentioned until it heals.
de la toust	Of dislocation
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the pormon are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an early illness, there should be two cauterizations on either side above the nose; and another cauterization in between the nipples; and let the clavicle cauterization be as described by its former shape.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, perform the "points" cauterization of which the form is previously described in the ear disease; and let the points extend to .xxx., or within that area. After treating the leu according to what has been said before, there should be other cauterizations at .iij. points as per this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And thus are the fire cauteries lighter, for one makes three at once from it.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	For the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the disruption immediately.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	b.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And caulk the gourd until it is pierced to the bone, and the shape of the caulking would return with four caulks; and because it is made by the caulker with three prongs, so the shapes of caulking are these four caulks; and their nerves follow the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the caulker with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it approached near the one nerve because there are eight caulks.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the caulk for grinding with salt; after making the patient rest and not moving the limb for long periods until it is well-comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	When it is dislocated above, little happens initially, then make a fire cautery on the thick skin with a caulking needle, or many cauterizations by poking. For the joint is reflexed, and bone becomes moist and wounds heal in the patient.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The chest cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that for pleurisy one must make root cauteries of aristology herbs, and in this way: take the longest possible root of an aristology herb, let it dry, and be as thick and long as your thumb; coat with oil, and hold over fire to cauterize. Make a cautery between the clavicle and collarbone, and two small cauteries slightly lower on the part below the jaw; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, declining slightly backward; one at mid-thigh, and another above the stomnaga, and one between the armpits, and two at each side of the fourth rib from the previous cautery; do not squeeze with your hand but perform openly as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some old ones say that no man should use fire cautery resembling a razor, placing it and heating between the ribs until reaching an abscess; then pain ensues as we have said in the liver abscess. However, in this kind of work there is doubt or immediate death for the patient, or fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of a mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of a mouse that we have described in the division of treatments, and it does not profit; then they employ three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	There are several ways to do this. You make three or four cauteries in line with the length of the wound, following the pattern of the liver's caustery which we have said before; and do not press your hand all over each cautery, and let the patient be lying on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of a caustery is that you show the one with two nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and move the head which is where the wound occurs on the left side, and let there be elevations from where you lift the head according to its size, following the width of the body, and the caustery should follow according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After inflaming the two nerves so that the head is pierced from the other side, then apply the caustery, and thus there will be four elevations. And if you see it, cauterize the entire caustery on three nerves. After the healing process has been going for a long time, this method is also as effective as the previous ones mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cauterization is not effective against dropsy, except for the method called "ascites." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions and your treatment proves unsuccessnful, then it becomes necessary to make .iiij. cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back above the spine, and one near the area of urination; and let the cauterization be close to the source of swelling.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cauterization open to allow drainage for long periods, do not cease treating the patient after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and together with the two intentions, they shall have God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the fire cautery for the stomach is the scapula as we have shown before; and that for the back is oval-shaped, as it is placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of swelling of wounds
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When wounds are swollen in someone who is hydrophobic, and are full of yellow pus, you must cauterize on the back between the ring finger and little finger; and lift your hand with the cautery towards the torso. And do not enter too deeply, thus limiting to the yellow pus, and make the cauteries according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cuts on each leg at the point of the shin bone; and let there be one incision below the knee in front and another behind, within the leg; allow these incisions to heal by curing themselves; afterwards care for the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	From the membrane
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the swelling of the stomach comes from coldness and moisture, to the extent that the vital and digestive properties within the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then make a large fire cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned or a cautery for the stomach, whereby the cautery circulates around it; along with four small cauteries encircling the belly, each subtilized to one fine cauterie.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery over the wrist, and one on each finger, and two small cauteries near the upper part of the stomach as it is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	In the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are foundational or several at once, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have described in divisions, but there is no benefit, so make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all below the almucantarat point and a little toward triangulation, and one under the buttocks; two points.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you think his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the stomach make a large fire cautery as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the pancreas with all the cauldrons; leave the cautery burning for long periods. Afterward, treat the area until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the gangrenous matter known as "theilum"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you encounter the gangrenous matter called "theilum," use the fire cautery that appears like a scraper, and then set it all ablaze on top of where the theilum is found; let your hand and the cautery come to the birth of the vein from which the blood flows abundantly. Do this once or twice, as we have said; if there is much theilam, cauterize each part just like before mentioned; afterwards treat them with profitable ointments until they are healthy again; and if you use a large fire cautery on the hematoma, it will give greater help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure an incision or opening, we will explain herein how to treat a disease that cannot be healed except by fire-cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a patient has an abscess that is aged and rotten with putrefaction and moisture corrupted, you must first try to open it all over carefully, understanding how much the opening extends. After heating up the fire-cautery until it looks like a shaving, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that has entered into the opening; continue with the cautery as long as the corrupted and putrid flesh is burned off, once or twice or thrice, depending on how much needs to be done. Be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and avoid large blisters. If the fistula goes into the urinary tract or intestine, be wary of these openings; do not force it too far, remembering that they are not perianal. After healing the opening until it is healthy, if the materials have been drawn out for a long time, then know that the fistula has completely healed. If the materials have not been drawn out, understand that the fistula is inflamed and corrupted bone at its origin; thus we will explain further in this section of the treatise.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold and swelling of the groin does not allow mating, then it is necessary to perform cautery on both sides of the area with the pointed caustic iron we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of and the painfuls cauterie the li muc, et lissoigne est cauterye ou li lea dousse cestors dole untile emic, oraside ilue les plus, et as it comes caustere esprend li line, soie oinçi eau.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold from moisture, such that the patient cannot hold urine, then make a cautery on the part behind the bladwer where the hairs begin to grow, both to the right and left, each of them long as our finger; and you make one cautery along the back, or two if needed; bevelled according to the previously described form.
de la marris	Of the joints
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the joints are cold and moist, not allowing it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with late endings; and when they come, so it feels great pain: then one must do for him three cauteries around the armpit as we have said of the bladder, and one along the back; bevelled according to our previous description.
de la hainche	Of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the thigh's girdle, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and one finds the leg doubled at departure, so you must cauterize the patient over the thigh's girdle with a circular cautery like those used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauldrons are not present, then use three large olive-wood cauldrons, and the cauldron should be as wide as all keys; and you must treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient should be cared for as we have said in the division, with a remedy that works; if the illness is old: then you must purge the sick person of large humors through foul pills or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and its manner is according to two methods: that is, using hot medicines or a fire cauterization. Fire cauterization has many ways, among which one way is as follows: you perform triangular cauters on the hip joint three times with this shape, making sure there's good depth and size, and each cautery should have space between them that resembles an egg; they are olive-shaped. One time, a cauterization was made in the middle under the top of the hip, because it has four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see it with the fire cautery at the circle as we have previously mentioned in the shoulder joint dislocation; but do so in a way that the circle contains the entire shoulder, and all the bones of the arm are burned to ash.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way it's done in sciatica when the pain is located in the hip and does not reach to the thigh or leg; if it reaches the thigh and leg, two fire cauteries are made where the patient says the pain holds them, and one fire cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, a bit toward the left side; they should use a scraped bone for the caustic substance, and let it burn to ash; if the patient feels that the pain spreads up to two or almost three feet from the ground, then at the point where he senses the pain make three or four points with the fire cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it's necessary because the pain is more; and if you know that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then make a fire cautery either circular or cuticle-like, but take good care in all your caustic applications not to harm neither nerves nor large arteries, and cause no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	Et j'ai vu des personnes qui ont fait cautériser sur le pied douloureux à la cheville, et ils l'ont élagué si fort que toute la jambe a été détruite, ainsi que les os, et tout le pied percé et corrompu. Après un traitement du ventre dont il mourut.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, do cauterization on both sides according to this manner. // And the wise ones speak of the cautery for the hip, and here follows the method, make a piece of iron that is as large as a small dactyl or slightly less, and it should be inserted between, so that from one gap to the next there is space equal to a fist; and they are two gaps apart and also straight, and have a well-made iron rod; and here follows the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have it heated so that it is all red and steaming, then place it on the bad hip joint, and turn it over to the ribbed side; and cauterize once with two incisions made at one go and leave for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and let the wound remain exposed for long periods; after applying medicinal ointment until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says we use little of this cautery due to fear for its effects, and few are seen using it; yet it is a good cautery, which can be endured, and where it presses.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the double pain in one's back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back by falling or percussion, or from excessive blood loss, or from similar signs of cold matter spreading; none of these conditions warrant cauterization, except for those resulting from infusion of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has voided of foul pills or similar substances, place them on their back where they feel pain, marking three lines with signs, and in each line make five cauldrons or more according to its virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauldrons be made as those called "points"; and if you see, do three or four at the middle cauldron according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a tight anus when they defecate, and pain; and you find on the last spine of the back and above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and treat it, cauterize with a fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the caustic is needed for any part of the spine, it should be evenly applied. And if you see a need to burn around the spine with a hot iron, making 2 or 3 lines and keeping them close together. After that, treat until it's healed as we have said, being careful not to apply caustic in an area where nerves are present.
de la dolor des jointes	Pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Joint pain is due to moistures that spread throughout the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which doctors properly call "gout," and if it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured with medicines, then they are treated with caustics like this: make a mound of caustics around the joint of the foot, and let them form an olive-shaped caustic according to this method.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If there is need to hold the face above the chin, make a full caustic with the chant "no touch." And if pains come up to the knee and other joints, which happens many times, make a caustic on each of the three or four joints, or two from each part, at all olive cauldrons; and if more is needed, do so, but do not hold your hand away for as long as the hair growth desired has occurred.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	If the pains descend to knees and backs, administer the caustic as we have described in this chapter. And if there are pains in the hands, make points around two lines of the fingertips; and if no pain remains in the joints, cauterize each joint and hair of the hand; and if pangs come to the edges or shoulders, causticize each part, and give good governance to the patient and provide appropriate medicines. For if you give them good governance and purge phlegm, they will be aided by God.
de la routure dou syfac	From the condition of the sore
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When swelling comes in the elbows and they hang loosely as new, it is necessary when you see them to cleanse without using those tools for that day; use things that soothe the belly, so that the bowels descend from the belly; afterwards have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to grip his arm until the swelling subsides, and reset the joints at your hips, and rub with a stick over the sore spot without touching bone under the elbow, and make any sign similar to three-quarters of a circle above the body; then apply this cauterization technique:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then let it be white and wet with exudate. Then reset the bowels at their place; and have the patient wash his hand so they do not return backwards; work well on the legs of the sick person, and put a cushion and belt over the thighs, and another under the buttocks which he holds with his hands; then apply the cauterization over the sign with all your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if not on the first try, repeat as many times as needed to reach the bcu; be careful that the swelling does not occur while doing the cauterization; do not burn it; and ensure by this means that the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	The cognez est le tis de quinze jors dix. Et cateres.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, have him wear a well-made bandage and keep it for forty more days; let him rest well, not exerting much or overindulging in drinking and eating, nor shouting too loudly; after following this teaching, one is completely healthy. And I will now describe the treatment of tailor's bunion as per its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of stomach disorders
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When stomach conditions appear in other areas and become noticeable, if you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and it should be two-thirds of the length; after curing as we have discussed; and none of the ancients said to apply the caustic at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first sign the place of insertion and make a line for the width above the incision, and another below it, and hold your hand over the entire cauliflower-shaped cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the healing of medicine does not help, then it should be treated with a caustic called "poins" using cautery according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and pain. If it is suitable for the first caustic, that's good; if not, another caustic should be applied above it, as the custom dictates that it should move within the limb nearest to it, so you must apply cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Surgery is often aided by fire for great relief, especially diseases arising from the putrefaction of moisture and melancholy. Can you cauterize it with caution if the disease is at its onset and has been treated according to what we have said in the division, without hesitation or delay, and doubting that corruption might harm the entire patient? Then make 5 fire applications: 1 above the forehead near the root of hair growth, another towards the front near the end of eyebrows; two on either side of the horns, one behind near the temple area. Leave your hand to let the cauterizing process reach up to the bone, and until scabs come out so that vapors from large humors can escape; then cauterize according to what is present.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	If the surgical incisions are all over, and then do not touch them with caustication of stone or cauterizations, and .ii. ii.; se tu ne li cauteres su les poinz d’aidement de la gis.i; et que il nen les sores sus lou tesirements sur le meselerie; et i.crescentement, si estremont les ait cautere sus l'onque ou li ne cauteres sus lou poinz quatilie, puissele; se tu ie ; ei.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more I do with cautery, the greater the benefit to him; and understand that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy ones do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cautery to be large or small depending on the members and joints, according to what you will find in treatments of metals. After curing the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals.
de enfleure	Inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammamen comes in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then you do cautery on the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be somewhat translucent so that one can see its depth. Then treat with oil until it heals. Sometimes a cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back at the nerve exit where the member moves, and thus if there is bone inflammation, you must do this; but never meddle unless you know the limbs and the exits of moving nerves.
de albaras	Of silvering
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras," which is chronic, and medical remedies are of no use, then you should cauterize with a cautery slightly inward according to the quantity needed for moderation until the bleeding stops and changes color; then cleanse it with flour paste and lentil juice mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with congee from colon and heron blood, one part each of all these substances combined together, bandaged tightly under a cloth, and kept in place until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When cancer begins to appear, and you see it starting, if you cauterize with the cautery that appears as a circle around the entire tumor; and in any case, healthy people say that cauterization is also done at the center of the tumor; however, I do not think this is good, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen before; and more preferably, it is to be cauterized around, with the "circular" caustic we have said about many caustics.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	From the swelling that cannot die out
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some have an illness called "adubelati," which takes too long to die or because of the excess it causes or due to the weak state (that is, being very old) and having little blood or time; then you should hasten its demise: so cauterize around with many small caustics by pricking; after this leave it as such. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, heat the cautery with this mold:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the midst of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the caustic has pierced its core, and choose such caustics that the patient feels forwardly somewhat so that the course of the poison is alleviated. After the cure until it is completely healed perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	There are several diseases known as "corrodens," which is nothing more than a mass on the limb, because it consumes the limbs just like dry wood catches fire. If you see this disease in place that can endure cauterization with both fire and searing, then apply small and large caustics according to what suits the location or where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you remove all corruption, ensuring nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted becomes osteoarthritis. Then leave it for three days, and put oil-soaked bandages on the causticized areas until the fire scars are healed, and all the corruption gone. After this treatment with medicinal balms containing charcoal; and if after three days no health returns, that is good; but if not, continue cauterizing what remains of the corrupted limbs. This mass has never been treated in place by the ague medicine before cauterization with fire; however, cauterization with fire always provides greater help, and I have already described the treatment with ague medicine after division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From the pus which comes to the wounds
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	que riz:
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	If they are turned towards the back of their body, and this often occurs in hands and feet; then it is necessary that you apply a hot water caustic: take a vessel made of tin or iron, or a spatula of lead, and place it on the nail and the bone beneath, which means for warts; put the vessel so that it covers completely, then put some hot water in it, hold your hand firmly, and press back as you turn until the edge of the vessel reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to find a deep pathway up to the root; allow the patient to endure the sting of the hot water for an hour. Then leave them like this, and they will loosen all their roots. In this way do one after another until you remove all those that are in the body, then treat with ointments containing charcoal.
li cure dou trembler	For curing of tremors
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	For those who shake with cold fever or other illnesses, it is necessary to make .ii. cauterizations on the spine; and .i. cauterizations between each vertein the back of the spine; and .iv. cauteries over the abdom. li vertuinement, and seiz cauterization ; and other maladies de la santez of pains du maladez-ci estainté d’autre: prenestrivenie ou dulacauceres; et aigrescuez.
des pustules puans	From pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	At no time are they visible from behind the bathing body, or pus-filled sores that come from large corrupt substances. If at first when they appear one should perform cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization with wood of myrtle, with its tip held in fire, or long root of aristolojo, or a lenticular cauterization. And not every time are cauterizations performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but is broken off their excess from which they come, and become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is severed
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great blood flow occurs from the artery that is cut at the wound which extends to the edges, or in incision of the abscess, or on burning of a limb, and similar things; and it is very painful to stop the bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case when it occurs to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain firmly until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more flows out; then apply olive oil cautery, small or large ones as needed, until they are all red-hot; then take (apply) either a large one or a small one depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery on the vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it starts to bubble when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery has cooled down, quickly take another of the cauteries that are heated in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do the same one after another until the wound is closed; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no other illness comes upon the patient; know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly close it by yourself unless it is through one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong pull of thread, or by medicines applied to which have the power to stop bleeding; and be tied and strained together.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	He who will administer tight bandaging or applying burning things to it, or similar matters if there is no benefit from them.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and they have no specific remedy or medicine at hand, then put their index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it well until properly closed over the wound and vein; do not move it, but apply cold water often enough that the blood is cooled and congealed and closed; and make small incisions there where you need to cauterize and use medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for cutting.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Here we have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire caustery or burning medicines, and blisters, causes, effusions, and forms of cauterizations; and I have included that chapter on head-to-feet, and I will proceed with this chapter by the same method so one may find more easily what they seek.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this, it is necessary for you, my dear student, to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of fire cauterizations, and therefore one must exercise greater care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In this work of the treatise occurs often blood evacuation when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and incision into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and it comes to death for some.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to undertake folly. For many ways of people come in cures: those who have become so accustomed to their illness that they die easily due to the severance from their illness and the greatness of its malice; and for these, one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these are those who give you their consent and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is despicable. You should not consent to those coming to you with this manner; rather, place greater trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not foolishly act on what you are certain of and can take and have lost; use prognostics and indications in the cures of your sick people so that health may be converted; and it will aid you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very precious thread, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to expire from the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by sections, as in the case of the cautery chapter that I have discussed from head to toe so that you may find it more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	At the top full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	by ; and what;s.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	In the treatment of this disease found only in children, and I have seen it swiftly bring death; therefore, I believe it is worth focusing more on specific remedies.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was swollen with water, and the skull grew larger each day until it could no longer be supported; the moisture accumulated to such an extent that he died. This moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the sphenoide, between the skin and the bone; thus in treatments like this where the moisture lies between the skin and the bone, abscesses are small, so one splits a fissure wide within the head, as long as twice as much as before.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more pronounced, and the abscesses are larger, then make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are openings at the corners of each part, and the sharp sound rings loud when pressed by your hand inside, and it has not been reset: then it must be split into three fissures as follows.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After the incision drainage is complete. Then strain the wound with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil; leave in this manner until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, allowing even pressure on the head, and allow the patient to eat dry meat with a bit of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is to observe whether the size of the abscess and the direction of fluid are consistent, for they never appear in front or behind, nor on the right nor left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then indeed make the incision where there is an abscess, and fill with water as you are able; and be careful not to cut an artery; and let blood flow out so that the patient does not die from loss of blood or evacuation of moisture.
de reume	To reshape it
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" affects the eyes or the groin, and the illness has been long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with what will burn off the three vessels.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then it is necessary that when you see the dislocation, have the patient raise his head; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then gently pull the neck on both sides by one cloth; then look where the vein pulses, and the eyebrows of each side are after the ears, but they lie close together; then sign the eyelashes individually, then cover each one with a strip of wool measuring two fingers wide until it reaches the bone, and wrap it as tightly as possible.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see this, place the wool strip below the artery and cover it from above, cutting as two fingers across its width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, have him jump continuously to his full height.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open by touching, it is necessary to measure three finger's width of space and sew up to the bone; then what is required in terms of blood loss is five pints (or roughly), with a chance for slightly more or less depending on what the patient can endure and the replenishment of the artery. Afterward, examine the wound: if it does not leave behind any spongy residue nor do abscesses form, then suture the wound and bandage it, applying ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	To remove a splinter
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old splinter causes catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and a long-standing swelling outside the forehead, and it is not helped by various remedies of medical treatment, then we extract the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes recesses in his temples, and listens to the artery which opens at the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and heals quickly like some people who are too cold; and if it has healed, then the patient strains their neck with a linen cloth, then rubs the area with rough cloth, and applies hot water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatula of which here is its form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then lightly scrape the skin as far as you find the artery, then tie it at the cut ends, and bandage well with towels that are below each part; and if the artery is fine, turn it on the tip of a pin, then cup that part according to the quantity of two eyes. For if it's not cupped, it will not heal completely in all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood of the .vj. cuts until .iij.; and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two strong strands of double silk thread so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and bleeding ceases; then cup the excessive tissue between the .ii. ligatures at the same hour, and then, if you see, seal with the fire cautery until to the bone as long as the eyes are cupped; and it's the mending work, provided that the patient does not have fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauldrons are aid to finish the moisture: for this is greater assistance than the moisture itself.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	In the matter of extracting arteries, one should fill oneself with much cotton and place it well-made bandages; and when they are loosened, treat them with dry medicines that produce heat, and with dressings, until it is healed; and if there is a cut in the artery as deep as you work upon, hurry to apply cautery, or fill your hand with vitriol and strain it so the wound does not get infected; and if this is not present, put cold water on the area until it freezes, then dry it out completely until the cut ceases, and restrain as needed; and that which moves easily in the extraction of an artery should be cauterized with a sharp part of the cautery, but the sharpness well blunted to protect longer from heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when inflammations are too tightly bound, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a certain space, and then when you hold them fast, take care of both sides; make the vein equal on both sides, and be distanced from both edges because it is not suitable everywhere for this fire cautery in all cases; this is the form of the fire cautery.
des larmes	Tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears descend from the eyes that are under the forehead furrows, and medicine does not help in this case where one acts upon it; and you see the sick person's face turn red like with fury, and their forehead tremble as if frightened; and oily secretions cause the hair to become matted and damp, requiring these treatments.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called the old one "contusion cure", and you should do this for the patient who has this illness with hair on his forehead, then make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be as two fingers all along downwards until the eyebrow, and the other two half-finger widths above the temples, and avoid cutting arteries that are on either side near the temples; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each cut should be three fingers' breadth apart.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have at hand a piece of sponge and several cloths for wiping the blood, then apply the healing ointment of two parts that are as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And for the incision that is from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that lies between the two incisions on the entire skull above the bone, then apply a portion of the ointment from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this ointment.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If inserted into the first opening is the instrument called "culterelle," and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And insert the knife-like tool facing towards the chest at its edge, with the smooth side against the bone and inserted until it reaches the middle incision. Then cover all the vessels that come from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to the opening of the throat, and then proceed in the middle incision to the other exit; then extract blood equally, and express the cavity for the collected blood; then place a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and cover with moistened linen cloths soaked in wine and oil and honey, ensuring that no abscesses form; and after three days remove the ligature, and treat generously with an abundance of fresh water tea, then apply a basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other remedies used for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	Upon examining the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come from acute catarrh frequently, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and impairing vision, and burning sensations; and the hair falls out, and headache intensifies, and patients sneeze; thus you understand from these occurrences that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from one cause, but rather multiple veins, and this miasm is what causes it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in it, with one end wide; and begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, cutting until reaching the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples when they move during eating; and once the bacteria are cleared, extract all blood using a sponge, then insert cotton wool between the two sides of the incision, and wrap with linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and prevent it from becoming infected; if healed, when new tissue begins to form, cleanse as necessary, which is how you treat open wounds.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of cinnamon to make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From stopping up of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, beast, stone from mine or similar substance; seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or something effused like water and easily flowing.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it flows from the ear in stone or other manner that does not fit with the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then distil some violet oil or sesame seed oil; and if there is a condition of crusting, cleanse the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and put cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and elevate the ear upwards. Often this treatment brings relief; and if it does not bring relief, then delicate extraction with tweezeburns is done in such a way:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out through the pinceries, that's good; if not, perform delicate extraction with a small doubled needle; and if it does not come out this way, make an ear wax plug and pour in the head of the plug or tiny hole in the ear strongly, then stuff around the plug with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the plug; then treat firmly, as often comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take some glue to which you attach feathers, and use any precise instrument that may be suitable for this purpose, and place a small amount of cotton around; then press the glue onto the wound or whatever thing it is, and treat firmpressly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from any of the things we have said, quickly cut open the ear as soon as pus appears and spasms occur, then the method of cutting is to first elevate the patient's head on a pillow, and draw out blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear near fat or whatever it may be; and let the incision be as round as a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then treat according to your ability, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is done in the form so that you do not come forth from it be a fendue de saut ou il vient quis le pendre; et ecutereux de les veigne l’oreille duil ne s’on l’os.
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision in that grain of wheat. But do not attempt this when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many attempts; then extract with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extractions be aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then if the water indeed enters the ear, it requires the patient to sneeze initially and fill the ear with old cotton. Place your finger on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out forcefully, it's good; if not, take many pieces according to the length of your mustache and make them light, then warm them up a bit by fire; and put the patient in front of one or two small holes in their ear, and pull on another piece from the other side, and cut into another stone placed above the stone that is in the ear; and continue cutting stones from stone until all water has flowed out, so it comes out fully; and if you see this, take a reed, and put one end of it in the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the thinner reed burns; then make another set of reeds as we have said on stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In extracting the beastie, if it is of small stature like a flea or similar thing, treat as we have said on division; but if it is large enough to feel with your hand, make an extraction with fine tweezamoins; and it's easier to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations and their treatment, if the remedy does not work, then examine the ear under sunlight; if there are no visible worms, use subtle forceps, and if they do not appear, take the bone that is formed:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrowed from the top and widened at the bottom. Insert the more subtle chief into the ear according to the quantity of pain experienced by the patient, then follow form completely throughout the bone; do this often until all the worms come out. If they do not emerge, stuff around the bone as I have said in the section on stones; and if they still do not exit as we have described, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the surgical removal of worms, and you will find them to treat with distillations. Apply your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument as seen:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It is made of silver or thin copper from the top and has holes at the bottom for distilling, and over to press down the distillation with a well-made bronze instrument; if you see a sponge around the tip immediately wrap it in cotton; then pour your oil or juice into the bone, and whatever of your medicines into the ear, and let the cauliflower be in the ear; then insert the sponge all over the cotton, and press firmly until the oil has distilled or dripped from the ear; and it will smell to the patient, and the distillations are made on fire as we distill them into the ear. Keep that they do not too cold, for your medicines would be so bad:
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the blocking of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any perception in their ears; and the same thing happens to people through wound healing or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these obstructions always come from the front of the ear, so that one cannot see them; and never do they cause complete loss of sight.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	However, if it cannot be seen coming from the front, there is good healing in various ways, and when one sees that you must place the affected ear to the sun; and look inside. If you see an apparent obstruction, then work on all of this membrane which is the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	the s.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If the inflammations are full in the ear, take a subtle and light rasor and warm it slightly by fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the inflammation causing the patient to have fear at hearing, carefully puncture it, but be sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the opening, and wool in the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do nothing for any day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and put in wool soaked with rose water, and powder over it with vitriol paste; and if you see the ear swelling, make sure to replace the tent and move another one made of molded rosette oil and wax until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and wrap it with cold water cloth, and place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove the bleeding by using distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelus that comes in papers from the roots when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to spread them with tongs and tweezebrushes, and the coat of a spatula at its root ends; then place the vitriol powder on top.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not removed, then the incision with a fine lenticular caustic is made, and after the incision is cleaned, sometimes it needs to be done again; as nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots dry up and do not return.
de la gresle	the following: a vowe them. The same : p. t, even of fact.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come in papers from the eyes things that seem frozen in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", consisting of a large amount of moisture on the paper above and below; the treatments are as follows: take care if grandine moves to one side or another, it's an easy thing to know; then make them wide apart, then lightly scrape each part, then use pincers, and cover. If you do not pierce the paper too much without cauterizing a bit of it, nothing will harm the patient; if the fissure is large, gather it with stitches, and treat until it heals; if it's small, do not force it, because ointments will soften it quickly and cause swelling.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if grandine descends into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over and use pincirs to grip and press on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no harm; and when grandine is cured, take the old water-soaked oil, and treat the place until the patient heals.
de la graisse des eulz	Oil of anointed oil to the afflicted area for relief from discomfort and inflammation reduction.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	It is called an ointment, made with threads soaked in paper and placed over the wound; it happens more often among children than adults, causing great distress to their eyes, leading them to become catarrhal by mornings, and unable to look at sunlight due to tears rushing to their eyes; thus they lie on their faces downwards, sleeping, with damp paper over their moist eyelids that the ointment covers and changes in appearance. And when you press its location with your fingers and feel exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The way to treat it is for the patient to place his head in your hand; then take a linen cloth and make a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then put it on top; press with both hands on either side so that the exinamenh gathers inside the circle; then insert a sharp spatula into the moist membrane making a cut as wide as the vein incision made earlier, and not larger than the wound made in the vein area; keep cutting until you reach the exinach; and various arrangements lead to exinach coming from the fissure, depending on the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Retrieve with your hand between both palms, and turn your hand to the right or left as long as it is scattered; and guard that you do not approach the fissure, until it reaches all the way up to the oil, which you do not cross it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the nerves do not exit at the beginning of the tear, gently widen the tear until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with linen cloths in wine vinegar, and place over the area, and bandage securely.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for such individuals who crush seeds and place upon to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat until it is healed. And if an abscess comes at the site, treat with plasters soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	Of hair from papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs appear misplaced from their nature and are infected, causing harm to the eyes, bringing about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and pus formation, until it causes destruction of the eye; and there is treatment according to four methods: by cautery with fire alone or by ague medicine as per what precedes in the chapter on cautery, and is done either by incision and suture or by needles, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the afflicted in your left hand, then turn the paper over to your left hand; if it turns well, it is good; if not, use a needle on each thread at once; and do this either near the edge of the paper or where the hairs are placed near these hairs, and pull one thread through all the paper, turning it smoothly with your fingers; then cut into the area below the paper, below the displaced hairs, throughout the entire swolpertum covering, from the large temple to the small; then extract a filament, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen cloth, then gently press on the paper with an envelope-like figure as if it were a marten's pouch, making sure that the shape matches the amount you see elevated in the paper from all sides.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	It istecosture s’olle .i. Se vient li moutrescuers d’esle evez ce que licescours se tire de les cuivre tout le rives costrel, puis la pristislesse cure à tous autres sensce a tu escrement desuex et c lues s jusques.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if by another method: and it is that you shape the paper into a form similar to a firesteed's bellows as we have explained, three-quarters of an inch according to the following shape:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cover that which surrounds with small forces equally according to the shape shown here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you are unable to hold the pincers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle with one thread, and put it into the figure; then pass another thread near the large edge, and the second thread near the small one, and evenly align both threads; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you have marked as we explained. Then join the two edges of the wound with a stitch, and cure it until it is healthy; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and other soothing ointment.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And at no time does the hair of the paper become discolored: if it is necessary to use what we have said about incision; but the suturing on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is as follows: and you shall turn the paper and fold it inward according to what I have said, then make .ij. stitches with a needle, and .ij. ligatures as long as the width of the puncture; and wrap around the heads of two parts where you hold the threads; then carefully join each part following the appearance above the paper at the hole, and tie off the .ij. stitches on each side; leave it thus for a certain number of days, and the tissue that was tied will die, shrink, and contract until it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed and the tissue becomes stronger, then treat until it heals properly; and if the wound has scabbed over, and no hair can grow where the paper was; and this is how you make .ij. stitchcuits in this manner according to these dimensions of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Procedures are such that you insert a fine needle, and then tie one end with a thin silk thread; then bring together the heads and carefully join both ends subtly; ensuring the length of the threads is about a palm in length; then arrange in sequence another short, delicate silk filament as a guide, and pierce through the head along this filament; place the patient's head on your knees, so that the procedure can be clearly seen, for it involves subtle and minute operations; insert the needle through all the way to its root next to the natural hair, and quickly cut with paper as you comb over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the base, and place into the sequence any other hairs that may be there - one or two or three or more; then remove your hand until only the hair sticks out on the paper along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the base is treated and hairs do not come out with it, comb through the base in reverse following all the filaments you have arranged, until they stand upright for clear vision; then comb through again and remove both the oil and leave two or three days, until new growth occurs on its original spot and scales appear thereon; and if the hairs are small, pair them with long natural whiskers, elevate it alongside the one you let remain, until they have moved away and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Proceed to be smoothly in oil sille unguen les dites le hairs soisle, et tu place t'est ouli anointment with a la poil and remove all the poils li ointes they on both them from the scalp : deo let both les petits.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the eye, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens by sudden wounds, cuts or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment is to split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and insert linen threads inside, and tie them until they are clean; and you should not use anything in its care that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but with things softening, such as fenugreek; and rose water or boiled lentil seed and oils infused with oil of sweet almond, apply them to a linen tent, and treat it like that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your care is to ensure that it does not re-form as it was before; and these treatments we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, preventing it from returning in its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the clot that arises within the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental in origin. The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; the process of treatment involves you taking an awl that has a double thread, inserting the needle into the clot, piercing it with the left corner to the right so that the threads reach two corners of the clot. Then stretch the clot across the entire needle, and cover it with a cloth as wide as a spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the appearance of the paper returns as it should be, that's good; if not, take a razor and place it in the tear, then turn the paper, making two folds within the paper; ensure the corners of the incision you made are at the corners of these new tears. Let them join so that when assembled, they resemble a letter with one "j" dot above (as per medieval notation); then remove that clot, according to its size and distance from the original tear as it's stretched by the paper, and bring together the two separated parts using a woolen thread; then care for it as we have mentioned before using mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary to make a clean incision above the hairline of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then between the two sides of a tent, as I have stated; and one must perform the procedure according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise devices with all possible means to return the figure to its natural form; and also the patients themselves, according to what incision and applications are required in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The binding of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this binding occurs between two pieces of paper in such a way that the top part is glued with the fat of oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, therefore one must then insert the tip of a razor undernelete; and stretch with pincers until you scrape off what is adhered to the subtle cautery, which does not become too hot nor too sharp, so that the patient can bear the heat of the cautery without being scalded or burned by it; and make the incision in such a way that you carefully scrape off the glued area, gently, so that the paper may return to its natural form; and is clean, and do not expose it ever in salt water, but let fresh water and woolen cloth. Then put between the papers and oil linen of flaxed with, then wet it until healed enough, as long.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the foot
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It is said that the nail has two kinds: one nervous and similar to hard pus, and another which is not nervous but resembles frozen moisture; when touched with iron and heated on the tongs, it does not move. Both types begin towards the great toe, growing slowly until they cover all sight, light, and movement of the foot.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of the incision is that the patient places his head in the bowl, then he holds your fingers; take out the paper to your hand, and then cut the nail with tweezamoors. Then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or mule or oxen's, or strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce it through the nail, and stretch it upwards, and scrape off all the hair on the edge of the nail that cuts and stretches it out. Then clip the remaining in the root with a subtlety and small forces, and let nature leave the natural or edge, so that by incision does not leak blood; and anytime:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the spatula from touching and breaking the flesh towel, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour in some boiled seal fat into it, and with a chain made of litargire, leave until the following day; then treat what needs to be cured until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle, and the hooks do not enter, this appearance of a fingernail has been treated with many medicines; they arise as I described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the oil of the malady, and use the light spatula slightly according to this method:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Remove the nail very carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish but rather advances quickly, distill from your mouth into the oil chains made of litargire and red wool with boiled seal fat, and strew the oil until the following day; then continue the other treatment according to this same work, until it is fully cured.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in this regard as with a hot abscess, then drain the pus and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh on the shin bothers you greatly in this regard by causing great harm, stop at an early stage and cut off part but not all, so that tears do not form; then distill into the oil a red collar made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of catarrh that arises over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some individuals experience redness in their eyes frequently, and cover the prenail and hold steady over the paper and turn it away from light, resembling a bold rose; the procedures involve the patient placing their head on a pillow, then working with the eyelids, and carefully examining all around for any abnormalities that may be present, supporting them with strength; firstly addressing the redness, thoroughly shaving down to the end as instructed in the nail incision and minor force techniques previously mentioned.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	When the incision is complete and you clean out all debris, apply oil of seal or distill red wormwood extract along with similar corrosive medicines, and cover with cotton soaked in egg white if necessary to ensure a hot sting; if there's no sign of heat afterwards, and the patient feels numbness, suspect a hidden abscess, leave the oil and treat with soothing remedcuents for burned sores. Then return to your usual procedure as long as it is healing, thus achieving cleansed oil in the affected area through this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary to balance the treatment for each natural weakness of sight; and injuries from accidents in surgical procedures with iron tools; do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that this member is healed.
des voines des eulz	From the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Red veins that are covered over the eye, and they obstruct vision and strain the eyes daily. Therefore, it is necessary for the first time you look at the affected eye in which this is found, as well as other maladies besides redness; then the treatment should be done thusly: instruct the patient to place their head on your hand, then gently compress those veins along the entire orbit according to your wisdom, and let them be twice as subtle following this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two veins compressed per degree in one direction following this method:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you apply those forces to the veins subtly, and squeeze out blood hour after hour until you see that you can remove them from the bone; and guard so that you do not bleed at the tips of the stumps, and perform this operation at midday before the sun, and be very diligent in your work such that you only touch those veins; and when you have done this, distil it into an oil mixture red and green to corrupt what is lodged in the bone.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot extract all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the bone with substances soothing to eye pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is alleviated and certainty about abscesses, then resume according to this method repeatedly until it is sound; and here are the forms of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	For the boil in the bone.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When the wound is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and by using hot medicinal ague as previously mentioned, if it is not healed, then employ a method in which you cut above the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that remains until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, then use all the instrument as described here; it is called "aspre chief," made of iron with a pointed end resembling a file in this shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the exposed bone, then twist with both hands and press slightly until you know that the corruption is removed; do this as many times as necessary before replenishing the wound area with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the ulcer is hard and hair grows on it, and the body of the bowel is hardened, remaining so for 40 days without healing or forming an abscess, and if there has been no discharge, knowing that it is healthy; if not, then the only other remedy than reopening the fistula at its neck according to this method: And take a piece of bone exposed twice by iron, and with medicinal acids, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this form, making the head of the iron have three angles, and let the shaft be tapered up to the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the temple, and keep your hand away one pace from the hole, then turn the drill completely as it penetrates the bcuil and you can feel by how much the patient moves if they hold their hand over their nose; and then replenish the socket with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when hair grows and the ulcer hardens, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the nostril
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When all the joints are fully opened and there is no disturbance to the nerves or reduction, it is necessary to bind the patient; then cleanse them, then apply blisters or cauterize without causing pain for draining, then place a poultice made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla on top; then strain the pus, and cover with bandages and linens; and arrange the linens so that they are sufficiently soft, folded into quarters four times each, placing one over another according to how much is needed by the joint; then stretch using a hard board for support, repeating blisters without causing pain for draining; then remove blisters leaving pus strained day and night, if the linen becomes softer greatly, it must be removed completely. If you see the pus return after a day and night, that's good, otherwise restart with bandages and poultice and linens until healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The disruption of the sutured wound
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	the twist des la ront le plas and les boneset ues:
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give a great appearance, pierce the subtle spatulate that comes at once from the edge of the oil, and it flows with white mucus which descends into the eyelids, and enters almost immediately; then extract until they are straightened.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called "alcunati" is not just water but appears like it in the eye, resembling running water, though it's not; its characteristic appearance for treatment involves seating the patient on a specially prepared and straightened seat, then grasping their head between your hands. As you see the bow coming towards your eyes, keep them wide open until it is fully visible. Then securely fasten it in place so that it does not fall out or become misaligned; observe as usual how the patient sees things, which should be similar to before. If they can't maintain their gaze (sustain), know this means a bow and you must apply treatment again as previously described; seating the patient, then using a fine spatula along the corneal layer until the bow is fully released.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the appearances of waters in the division, and what is needed to pierce; thus in work according to healthiness. It should be done that you seat the sickly between your crossed hands, away from light because of the sun, and clothe them with clean oil and tightly bind it; then put the paper containing oil on your left hand if their eyes are also left-sided or on your right hand if their eyes are right-sided; then take in your right hand, if their eyes are left-sided, an instrument called "almagdal", or with your left hand if they are right-sided; then put the tip of the instrument next to the crown by a small distance as much as a hair on that part of oil near the lesser outer temple, then insert the almgaldal instrument vigoraturally and rotate your hand until it pierces through the paper of oil, and feel that the almagdal is emptying into the thing. And it should be that the path of the almagdal instrument is to the full extent of the space from the prunele up to its end near the nape; this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone on the paper for the translucence of the corneal cloth, then bring the instrument to it or where the water is, and press out from below after another way. If their waters are now flowing, you will see the sickly in front of you and the instrument inside its oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	them.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if an instrument cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, for there are men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you use the tool called "alberit," of which here is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And indeed pierce the conjunctiva just slightly, not too deeply, but make it quite fine, then apply the ointment as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a suitable bed in which he can lie on his back in darkness; and be free from all movement, feed him lightly, do not move his head to the right or left, and keep it immobilized according to its position until the third day; then release him into that dark house again, check his vision, let him see various things, and then reconnect the ligament until the seventh day; and you must not perform this during the hour of treatment or immediately after incision now, but rather wait for it because the swelling rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If abscesses are present, on the seventh day you should release the oil and apply the soothing ointment for abscesses; and when it is calmed, cover its face with a bandage each day, and keep it in that dark house. And then gradually leave the dark house every day, and let him resume his usual activities; and know that no students should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	A man came to us from the Yrach who told us that in our land a strange occurrence took place where water would flow, but I have never seen it in our territory nor read of it in ancient books; and perhaps this is a new discovery.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the forms that resemble Almagda, because those who do not know them see them thus; and they are indeed akin to rain.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of these beings have a similar subtlety, and their bodies in three corners with water.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	At no time do chariots with various attachments arise or near the nose; and some appear like scorpions at the tip of fingers; and if there are such with a veil of wild color, and those below bone color. In these cases where the chariot is below without a veil, it should be made for the patient to sit between your hands toward the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour ointment on that part of the chariot, then remove any hairs or filaments; next cover what you can hold with a very fine gauze over one side until you know that entire cartilage is bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, work all the subtle points lightly, such that nothing is left; and if it forms a bump or abscess as it should, then treat it accordingly; and if they are malignant abscesscups, haste to cauterize until it is fully healed and all cartilage parts are turned to bone, then pour oil or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the work is not done, and moisture reaches up to the palate, believe that it is safe; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is decay in the bone above, thus the tendons do not come loose for cutting: then you must tie a linen thread somewhat thick, and let us both hold its ends with our hands, leaving between each of us a length of about two fingers; place the patient's head under control with the thread at their neck as best they can, and draw gently until it comes out through the mouth; many times this is done for children in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who are willing to do so; then hold one side of the head that comes from the neck with one hand, and the other side coming from the mouth with the other hand, and watch each carefully as we are holding onto the thread. Do this until you know that our threads have dissolved that decay, then pull out the thread, squeezo
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And make it of silver or brass, like an open lantern, as with a panhandle, and guide in the same manner; and if you see, then create a closed handle for the purpose of expelling from the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	I; And it'fat;
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times arises in the head of the neck a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, one must begin by cutting out entirely, then apply hot caustic or burning medicine; if not treated promptly as it grows, be aware if it's hard, discolored, with poor sensation: do not treat with iron as it is an incurable boil, for when cut once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the boil is from a sensitive touch, without discoloration, and you see that one can cover it entirely, then relieve the patient of fear and anxiety while treating drying and tightening matters.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut and caused by this,
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a continuation of solutions comes in one of these cartilaginous structures, it is not effective in any person. Therefore, when this happens to you should do as follows: if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew up both sides are torn; and if so that you bind the edges together, and cure until they heal, then suture the two sides; and paste poudre of dragon's blood and powdered, and incense a resin, and sprinkle it with frankincense with frank ashes or another from another ash.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of suturing is such that you assemble the stitches: either with needles, as we have said in the abdominal wound treatment; or with thread, as I have instructed you before.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For abscesses on the lips that occur hard like grains of barley, small and larger; then it is necessary to turn the lips over, make incisions above each one, take with forceps and tie into sections; afterwards apply vinegar after lithontriptor incision until bleeding stops; then soothe with a salve, and treat the wound area until healed.
de la char des gencives	From the gum of teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often there is swelling above the gums, which the ancients called 'albulus'; it must be held with forceps, cut to its root and allow blood or pus to flow out; then apply vitriol paste or other powders that are restraining and drying. If the abscess returns after incision, sometimes requiring a second enucleation and cauterization; if it does not return after cautionery, these are methods for treating ulcers.
des sordens	From scurves
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At times they are assembled in the head of the gums, within the mouth between the gums, unsightly and sharp scales; at no time are teeth black and yellowish-green and pungent until corruption comes to the gum, and teeth become foul-smelling. It is necessary that you make the patient sit with their head in your hand, and his eyes in your holy place, and remove any teeth or scales found, as long as nothing remains; thus treat discoloration and greening, yellowing, and other afflictangs until they are healed; if what was removed at first treatment is still present, it's good; otherwise, begin anew on the second day and then every third day until everything is gone; know that teeth require various forms of dressings to heal, according to how the work shows, because those who fail to extract gums have different shapes than those extracted between them; these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating the tooth's pain that you delay with the drilling as long as possible, because it should not be done at all; for it's a substance very deep until there is no excuse for extraction.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Quant cest par tout la ou dolent qui le est, tant que sont li, pour a pain de s les sainte certain, soi du toile nus soit: dent; the pries andre, or. Then, ceu que tes, dou, itm.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these substances and pour them inside on each side gently, then move it as you did initially. And if the nerve is pierced and mixed, one must fill it with cloths at the points where they are loose; and carefully widening with pincers so that it does not break upon extraction; and it requires working very diligently around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not break it, leaving a part behind, and causing the patient greater pain due to the root's mischief. Be careful not to act as ignorant surgeons do, who, in their haste and boldness, break the cartilage every time without implementing what we have discussed; they often bring about great illness for the roots that remain or for the cartilage that is broken, as we have often seen. And when a tooth is extracted, cleanse the area with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding occurs there, which often happens, apply leech salve; and if it does not suffice, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the substances that numb the nerves first are those with sharp points and large knobs, which do not double when you extract the tooth; these are the ingredients:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have large limbs that do not bend at the joints, and be made of well-forged iron, and equipped with teeth to hold together.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root of the tooth is out of place, you must put cotton-wool greased with butter on it for one or two days until the bone softens, then apply the tweezebacks called "algefri", which make the head look like a surgeon's knife; and they should be made similarly to a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	; çamma; they. We's, com; in t.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be careful and firm so it does not break, if the root jumps out when struck like this, that's good; if not, then assist with all means possible, which are how they come about later on.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses the instrument with two prongs, this is where the form comes from:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools placed in front of dense materials, and that instrument which looks like large pliers, from which comes the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this is the manner that it cannot be broken, and know there are many such instruments of iron; likewise other instruments which are not counted among them; and the wise masters subtilly find by themselves their instrument according to their works and what the disease shows, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the variety of parts; nor does it break a horse's carriage or other bones, but rather it searches for the instruments which I have told you about, and assists with movements, here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Let them be large and well-suited to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore the bone in place with appropriate medicines for this case, and if there is decay within the bone, and it is small, all of this instrument is required.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not in their natural position and the shape is unsightly, especially in young women, it must be known whether the nerves are behind the tooth and it's not on its rightful spot; and it cannot be filed or sharpened. Therefore, grind it; and if there is decay with the tooth, take this instrument as shown below, which resembles a small beak, made of iron narrow at both ends:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the wax softens little by little due to the hardness of the teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then grind with a portion as is its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like the grinding of needles; and gently grind the tooth little by little, so that it does not move until it becomes sharp; then in the end smooth out any roughness completely, and if it is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then grind the sharp edge until it is even, so that it neither cuts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	When a tooth chips or breaks: take some wax of aloes, and melt it well in boiling water; when it is liquid, pour it into the hole and press the broken part against it until it sets, so that no food will enter. Then you can grind down the protruding edge as mentioned above.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When teeth are loose due to impact or falling out and the patient cannot press down on what they chew without salivating, and you have treated them with restraining medicines which do not work; then it is necessary to bind them with a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and corrode, but gold does not change. The wire should be of medium size according to the space between the teeth; if you see that they are leaning towards each other, take the wire and wrap it double around both healthy teeth, then place the points between the teeth as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then resume coverage up to where you began, and gently pull with a subtle motion so that they do not move; make sure your force is at the root of the loose tooth so it cannot escape. Afterward, cut the points from the wire using pliers, then rejoin them between the healthamte teeth, placing it in such a way that it does not touch the tongue. Leave the area tight as long as possible until it stays; if they become loose or break off, tie with another wire; this will remain and work throughout its duration, restoring the shape of the teeth and alignment after healing:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out and is reset repeatedly as we have said; it should only be done by someone who is wise and patient, ensuring that the shape resembles an animal's tusk and placing it where there is a deficiency, then binding as previously described, which will remain effective for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	heal; ici et soet:
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	At no time is this dislocation which comes from below the tongue or nature, as we do so; or by accident of a burned wound; and the treatments are such that you work on the mouth with the patient's pain, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve-linking ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or softening, and it is of burned wound, so you tie the ends with a string; and ensure that the tear is not too wide for the artery underne
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch, for it is cancer; and if it appears to be swollen near a vein, and there is moisture, so drain with a string, and bandage it subtly with a gauze pad, and release from both sides; and if it remains unchanged after your treatment, then place vitriol paste until it becomes non-threatening, then return to your treatment as long as you manage all of it; then raise an irrigation of soothing and cool water, and care for other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	let the patient est lest et cite et s lee ou lien it tolte et est oint eil or irt a tu tien and d are vitriet; then, be nail te untie fete. It is en chole est of de prist vrai at so the treat, et l’est, or hento: let the pli cure:
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	At no time does a throat swelling known as "godath" appear, and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, take care: if it is an abscess small of slight color and softness, do not touch it with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either, for blood discharge; but let them remain until they fall off, then you will split them when they break on their own; and if they are white in color and the roots are subtle, prepare the instrument properly to cut, but first ensure that the abscess rests calmly and is soothed. Then make the patient sit with his chin towards the sun, with eyes open and mouth agape, and he works with a stick between his hands holding the tongue out from all sides of the instrument; it should be made of silver or fine steel like knife blades.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue with all of this instrument and observe the abscess, take the needle and insert it into the almonds, pulling as much as you can; then tie everything together above using a cord on the instrument, which has the form of a strong force; however, its head is curved, one end being higher than the other, and they are very sharp, made either from iron or silver.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	Herein form, soie on that, heup, lessepses de woulons endrement et s; and a it is le instrument, the c of them beaus la. And when they are all tu ce quat to l’est in this est qui sait and cope as you, and d istur?
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be sharp on one side and dull on the other, and when you have caught up one of the roots, then catch up the other in the same manner, and after making an incision rinse the patient's mouth with warm water, vinegar and saltwater; if blood flows from wounds, then rinse their mouth with hot water or scrapes of pomegranate peels that have been boiled, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things until there is no longer bleeding; then treat them as long as they are healthy; and never do other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two roots, so remove these accordingly like the two roots simultaneously.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess within her throat, which was of small size; and it had grown so large that the entire throat was blocked, preventing her from breathing through any passages, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died if she remained thus in one day or two. The abscesses were so swoln up they had broken out through both openings of the necks. So I immediately acted and pierced it with a needle, then pulled the pus, pulling out quite a lot; then reinserted another needle into the other opening, pressing on her mouth and squeezing her tongue; after that, I inserted a needle in these abscesses and sucked up part of it, and did not extract much more than just blood from it; thus was cleared the pathway of her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, continuously working on removing this abscess for long periods; but the abscess would always grow back again, refilling the space that I had emptied until it became very large. Then I deceived it and cauterized inside her throat: thus, it stopped growing. And so I left these parts, and only God knew what happened to her after me.
de l’uve	the abscesses of his body part as much water and had for ever and out from pus of his she grew them, then with c very much that in too long. Et after may be done it so I did the throat a thou s is not left and dry needle it be to her out the back the same:
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When they are re-inserted into the eye and it is fallen out of place, become elongated, then be called "perpendicular"; and if it becomes large and round, call it an eyeball. If after being cut as we have said in the division, the healing does not work and you see that the abscess has calmed down, and is subtle, then it must be excised; and those which are rounded and not elongated, and are red or flesh-colored or black, then an incision should be made on them. For there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its position and length, seat the patient in front of the sun, press their tongue with the instrument we previously mentioned, then insert a needle into the eyeball, and remove from below, and excise at .i. of the .ij. strands that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it must be ensured not to excape more than the natural boundary; for if you escape beyond this, it causes harm to the voice and speech; and after the excision, proceed as we have described with the incision of the .ij. almondcups. And use caution in cauterizing due to fear of the patient, then use a device to distract their mind from that sensation. The nature of this cautery is clear water. Ensure that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument previously mentioned for the cautery kit, and confine with clear lively salts; and apply the pressure as indicated by the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the head has a hair or an object with the medicine, similar to a spoon handle, and you place the instrument over the entire medicine on the eyeball; have the patient lie down on their side so that they salivate and mucus flows from their mouth containing the medicine without entering the throat or esophaghren; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the eyeball, applying a quantity equal to half an hour's worth of watches until you see it become clear and the biting sensation from the medicine subsides. If you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any instruments, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place all the cotton over the incision on the eyeball until the cotton becomes red; repeat this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to reapply the medical cautery, do so, and after the cauterization use a clean cloth dipped in butter around the eyeball, and cleanse what has been around with the medicine; rinse with cold water and perform gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective through incision rather than the cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and yellowwort and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of these into a pot, add water to ease boiling; and the pots be well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot have an instrument fitted according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And be it of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be inserted into the mouth of the patient while the vapors rise through the tube until the vein is congested; often restart this process until the vein dries out, and ensure that you do not perform at the onset of a hot abscess for many things may occur; and never do so only during the decline of a hot abspect. And if such an instrument is not present, take a tube and place within it a lead ball to prevent excessive heat in the mouth; because the lead ball does not obstruct the vapor from affecting the mouth, and this is a good cure together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and many times one pierce the throat or spine of fish bone, or anything else; so it must you see what you can then press your tongue to all the instrument to the sun; and let the thing moves not and is put in the throat, so that he swallows with vomit out.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the mouth be raised to the throat so that it may more easily enter into the gorge, and keep the head lifted high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that nothing does not hinder its movement, nor push in the bone within; move as if the patient inserts the instrument, because it should be moved where things are easier; blow through, or shepherd equally along the entire instrument until it is clear.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of throat swelling
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Medicine for swelling of the throat, as I have said in the division, by the cure with medicines; and if it does not improve at all, then look into the throat of the patient under sunlight, then press the tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see swelling, treat it with a small lancet or delicate pincers as much as needed. And if this is insufficient, take a glass vial and blow into the throat of the patient, and do so frequently. And if the patient's mouth turns green for all day, then fill up an earthenware cup with cold water, have them drink it through their mouth, and swallow it slowly; and as soon as the swelling feels the water, it subsides.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If it does not come out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with vinegar using the instrument mentioned in the eye fumigation; do this many times, for it will yield without tiring. The method of fumigation is that you take a pot filled with coal and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and therein place the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation and have the patient put their forehead to the mouth of the vessel, close their lips so smoke does not escape but enters through the nose; this sinus will yield now, and if it still does not come out, restart the fumigate repeatedly. The patient must endure thirst, and consume unsanitary foods and ale, but should not drink water; eventually, they will need to be relieved by this method of treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to treat the sinus is similar to pincers bent for entering the throat; it resembles an apothecary's spoon and has a rough surface like limestone, so that whatever it takes in cannot become satiated. Here is its design:
li chapistres des apostemes	The form of this instrument used to treat sinuses; it is similar to the throat resembles an apothecary's spoon and has a rough surface for enters like limestone, so whatever that takes in cannot satiated. Its design:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, as remembrance comes to us from one and another in this book, and they are diverse by perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways of the same kind itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for the heads or locations within the body. For abscesses on the head are different than those at the base, and abscesses on a limb bone are different than those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If to an abscess one must not perforate until it is fully healed according to its completion; and if of such that one must perforate when they are ripe, and do not die fully according to their completion, as with an abscess near joints. For when abscesses occur near jointamoign, and left alone until they become gangrenous around it, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that limb member. Or if the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay perforation until fully healed, it will harm the principal limb; or if near the base, one should perforate as soon as possible once dead; and do not perforate an abscess before digestion is completed, except for those near the base, which may become gangrenous throughout, form a fistula within, and cannot heal in great duration.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And anoint andres leu perforation ou ce ne puet leapeme est douces la apere les leaument lede, semblanz lee depite the apocre l'amon; et li a leue oralz nulte: un peu de cest lor euf. Eve asme si tu les pois que ce amputes d’apet en la perforation ne doit armet, est lair seiz, et aument s.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases where they bulge, according to that part of the body. And when abscesses are in place filled with decayed flesh, allow the puncture to remain until digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it prematurely, the poison spreads throughout its veins and fills it with copious filth; and occasionally they become hardened at their orifices. And for any abscess that protrudes according to the width of the body, as much as the member requires. It is necessary to treat small abscesse
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those without a head, as with superficial abscesses, it is necessary to puncture them directly; and if the abscesses are large and have formed a significant swelling, puncture it but not remove all of the swelling at once, but puncture one part; then leave the abscess until the next day, then do nothing further. Repeat this process gradually more and more each time, until the entire swelling is gone; especially if the patient is weak in virtue or a woman carrying children, or small infants, or elderly men growing frail. Because occasionally with the release of the abscess, it may cause the patient's death, so you should not risk it. Therefore exercise caution when treating this procedure and once you have located your abscess, cleanse the wound and check if the incision from the abscess is small; and if it is a simple sore, dress it with old linen or cotton; and if there are large abscesses with many openings, make sure to tie each one so that they come together; and if you have excised part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old linen or cloth fibers without moisture, and bandage until the next day; then untie and apply ointment as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	s cont ce plet.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally for the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of pus-filled sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Or of small abscesses that are like the backside of a female rabbit, and there are many such forms; some are fatty with moisture just like hairs; and others hardened on cutting, without any doubt when they pierce as arrows do. And the treatments for these wounds involve using all instruments called "entromissors," through which healing occurs afterwards, whatever it contains. If it contains moisture, then it drips down from above its length. And once the moisture is drained out, scrape without leaving any hair that holds the moisture, as it returns again if left alone; next dip a swab in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise in water and soap, and place on the wound until the following day; then use this method continuously for each night. And afterward, resume the process with the cotton swabs, just as before, the second day, the third day, until you are sure it does not linger through the night; then apply healing ointment suitable to its need until fully healed. If there is a greasy pus, treat according to this manner and lengthwise; insert scrapers into all parts, and place your entire treatment regimen on the shirt or cloth where it lies; and if the arrowhead strikes again as I have told you afterward. And in the same way do for an abscess that is hardened like a knife, and cut out its lining, so as previously instructed.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the tunnels of a pus-filled abscess and moist, it is easier, for they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or heads do not have moisture, and from those come some that I healed at an old woman's head; and found the abscess hard like a stone, rough and scaly, and could not break open; and had anyone struck it, they would have made as good a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, where those come from children's heads and ear root bases, the opening should be done daily at the most convenient time for them to drain pus; and treat them as needed.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas (tuberculous swellings of lymeboards)
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the glands, and on the armpits, and some other place or body parts; and they are large, and intertwine with each other. Each scrofula, and each is properly within its own part, as if the head, as we have said; and the forms of these scrofuls. There are many. Some contain moisture, and some malicious who do not want to obey healthy. In the one that looks good condition at toucher, and is not ache on neck arteries, and does not red or veins nor conduit it too much; and not deep; then cut by above, so that should you have no nerves as needed, and neither in of painful, as some. So if needles, but do not pierce the same; and the blood be all sanz to remove is very little and let them not leave; and touch.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work there, then apply a vitriol paste to the wound or certain powders that remain in the blood, and tighten the wound; let it heal as long as the abscess is soothed and softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task until completed; then follow your proper course if there are no small scrofulous sores, which you cleanse and cure. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not cut out that scrofula from its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it hang without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then gather its two sides of the wound and hold them together until no excess remains due to its size. If it is necessary for you to open up to the root of it, draw out any pus as we have said before; those scrofulas that contain excess, pierce where they are most swollen; then treat with ointment and similar things so that whatever has been retained by corruption begins to rot; and when the ward is well cleansed, cure it with fragrant oil until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	And if you need to apply as needed for heals, but pus infection or inflammation, then wash oil again. Et si lesenence so long and where has been bled ointment and corruption; and the tarnish and swelling becomes it offensive after s until is gone by asewisent when needed for as much worms the unctamit with salve until of, and heals then oil until.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote of throat surgery; but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with epiglottitis, it is necessary to make an incision in the throat called "epiglotte"; and one does not help by doing so because all blood vessels and the main vein of the ailing are affected where abscesses heat up in the mouth or in the throat or in two fists.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main vein, it is necessary to cope with the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, let us cut above three circles or four-one small slit across, between the two circles or through the quantity of the slit in the jawbone, not into the throat.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And if those eyes are close to the cutting of the epiglottis, there is no harm, and the vessels are long-lasting within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, it must be extended with leather from the neck to the full extent, then cut away the flesh as much as possible until reaching the vein; and avoid blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cauterize the abscess, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	It is shown by the severing of the phlegmatic humor that jumps from its place and through the rupture in the vocal cord due to lack.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leaves an open wound exposed a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour of doubt about strangulation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound at its opening, and sew them with thread that adheres to tissue; then apply remedies which cause flesh to grow until it is sound again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Until you completely clear out the throat, and the patient is judged close to death, and there's no remedy available.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then you should cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe through their mouth, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And they command that the nostrils be left open until the effects of the disease have passed, which usually takes three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	:s and le estlzela car. If you see con t.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden received a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting off part of the tongue.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	Et I went called to cure him, and I found him just as lifeless.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found blood that had come from it, and clearly, it had not eaten vein or carried food other than throat fluid, and the wind came forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed up the wound and healed it until it was cleaned.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	t. The xtruer.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Thus I tell you, in treating the epiglottis there is no fear at all.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses the color of jet, and occur often in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	to lesmplee them from so younazed le t.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	The accident occurs in two ways: one seems like swelling of our flesh, and the other appears as an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it does not become necessary to work with force unless in that which is small, and testing and seeking all the implicated.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as with one of our flesh, and not attached to any vein, then cover (it), just like we bandage ourselves, and treat the entire headpiece, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search thoroughly, and treat as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	And thus we.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways there are of us, and all the similarities I will tell you now.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now let me explain all the differences between ours and their dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that it is fever and heat-stricken until the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then rests both fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With ours there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a sore, which is its own sac and according to the color of the body, and begins like glasswort, and becomes swollen.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and there are two appearances or flaking, or wetness, with much of the colors as I have described in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of ours that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments called "intermixtures," according to what their form will be or procedure, which is afterward.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses in our body is that you grab or use more moisture where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers slowly, as long as you know that the pus has felt its head, then when it's according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entorse, and be careful in doing so that there is no more force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs from the vein, then see what colour it has, do as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the interposition there is no moisture, knowing it is fatty, then rub accordingly with a cross motion, and grasp as pinchers, and lightly scrape off each side, while preserving the coat where it lies that you treat it cleanly with vinegar from within.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot make it clean, then cut into pieces so that nothing remains inside.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lingers a bit and the wound is grieved, apply some poultice of corrosive acid powders to the wound, bind the wound, and place soothing substances against abscesses, then treat with other remedies until healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it is great, close the two edges of the wound and treat with what generates heat.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it is contrary or something else, haste and apply the powder of vitriol to it, leave for two days or three until the wound heals, then let it rest from bleeding; afterwards return to what was delayed earlier.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Look at the forms of entangled extremities, and there are three ways to manage them: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called "albaret", one which is called "breb", and there are again three methods: large, medium, and small for examining abscesses in the anus.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are as needles used in enchantments, made of citrine or iron or silver, with yellow ones being the most effective, while those that are blackish-brown are best for investigating anal abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and there are three methods: large, medium, and small, depending on the amount of width in the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of boils are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two heads in three different ways.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And those with three heads and are in three different ways; and those with two heads but only one head at a time, and they too come in three varieties; all these must be treated as found.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these that are cut is sharp, and some that do not just cut but scrape the skin, so as to avoid cutting the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these dislocations are the alchemists placed in their proper position, so that the patient does not suffer at the onset of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three ways: large, small and how to see if you find.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And it is not used elsewhere but where there are legs, arms, thighs, elbows, and similar joints.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And never is used any instrument small, similar to scarifications of fistulas, according to this method, which stops bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And is les scespecez de fassaint, and formant of poignent; nus d'un est blesse en tient.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At no time do men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swolebreast-like; and if it is to be treated by the following form of this line B. until G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with medicinal salve of larch, then join the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is mended.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	When the limb falls on its side and becomes numbed due to its size, as it often happens in women, causing pain in two ribs above, by means of two similar cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of which one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B up to line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin between the two edges, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have mentioned of stitching and powders, and that which is necessary for the healing, until it becomes clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not sanitary, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow issues, then you must fill the wound with cotton cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it to heal until the remainder and fat are consumed, then cleanse until sanitary.
des apostemes des asselles	Incisions in the elbows of abscesses.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These boils that arise from under the bones are hard scrofula cases containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bow that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply healing ointment as much as needed for it to be healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble those of scrofula, cut as we have described for treating scrofulous sores, and if the wound opens up again, treat it with fire cautery as we have previously described.
de la routure de l’artere	From bleeding from the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the vein is ruptured, and the skin over it swells up, this often leads to abscesses, as well as bleeding of the vein and abscesses.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if the hernia is near it because of the artery, there are large abscesses within.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it in your knees, then you sense a strain; and when it's due to the vein, there are sudden disappearances of bruises.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	ndroit
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary to remove the iron poultice, and those who are in shock must also be relieved of it, and for those with a swollen artery above the long skin layer.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the tonsils, and gently free the artery from bandages until it is revealed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle under it and puncture all the way to the opposite side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two layers, as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then straighten the joint that is between the two ligaments of an interarticular so long as the blood flow continues to it, and let the abscess be drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then treat the wound from a bowshot until the ligament heals.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply a suitable ointment to the area until it heals.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if the abscess is too large for the vein, it is necessary to take hold of the abscess with your hand as much as you can grasp of its skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then draw out the arrow from beneath where you hold with your hand and pierce it, and make it have a double thread so that you can pull from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then bind the abscess as I've told you or tie it with one of the two threads by the armpits;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	If you suspect that the child is not well, if you replace it with another needle at all, remove one of the threads from all the abscess and incise where the first needle was placed, then hold the threads in four lengths.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then drain the abscess until all excess has gone, then cut away the swelling at its root and leave what remains attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with bandages and poultices until it is healthy again.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses of veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in arteries and veins, they arise on the nerves when struck or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, and it is .i. grief abscesses, the color appears like that of a sick body, and in various forms causes pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	the w they iste or:
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it is immobile in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, neither up nor down. The one with the joint should never be bound by iron, for there might be muscle contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And he who is at the head or forehead creates a wound in the scalp.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, use forceps to hold it by its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	
des grosses boces pendans	From large hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never occurs in other parts of the body but only there, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance, with subtle roots and large heads; and within them are both small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a home that had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, with no differences, white in color, having fine roots, splitting openly, and containing moisture within.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	the following them:d.ere. The dictionary is said it self.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the skin over a swelling is wide, and be present with the fire cautery. For in cutting too often great blood loss occurs, and if it does not stop itself, then promptly use the cauterizing instrument.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient anxious and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and bind it to his arm as we have said, and leave it on for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then the restraint, and continue to keep the thread of linen on until it heals through it, and if there is no more pain; and if the roots are large, be careful with iron around his stomach as well, but you properly cover most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize so it does not reoccur; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the inflamed area that is of a sickly color, poor feeling, and lacking in vision.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an advanced syphilis sore, and I shall come for the treatment of this gonorrhea hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the foot becomes lame like that
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a hernia comes from a wound or fissure on the face and is found in certain areas of the abdomen, as it occurs in other regions, or blood flows from veins or arteries according to what lies before, or swelling.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is from the fissure of the face and by the hernia outlet, then its appearance resembles that of normal skin, feels light without pain, and has various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestinal outlet, then it varies more, and when you press on its sides, they bulge, and then return, and sometimes it becomes tense, significantly enlarging at the opening of the bathroom and causing severe pain with hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	If it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and when you press it well with your hand, do not constrain too much; if it is for blood, then it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and they are embedded according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for swelling, then it is sensitive to touching, and the treatment should be such that you observe whether its appearance suggests blood from an artery, vein, or swelling.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary to let the treatment remain. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestines or bowels, it is proper to instruct the patient to wash his hands, and they should be extended straight up, then tie a bandage all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then command him to lie supine between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the area that you have marked with all the liniment,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then extend the bandage over the abscess above all along its length.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Next, bind it tightly with a strong thread or cord of durable silk and make sure the knot is secure.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work the bandage over the incision and apply your medicinal plasters, and close up the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught on the ligament, then dislocate it, and place the intestines back into their proper position within the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	If you find swelling, grasp the sinew, and cut away any excess tissue.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	If the artery is against you or bleeds, and it swells greatly, then return to your work, take two needles, and tie two thread ends on them, and insert these needles where you made a cross when you performed incisions.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When you find a wound that is subtle and piercing, then treat it as necessary, and heal the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and bind it up.
dou chancre	On abscesses
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	by any tegne cht; and then prud; If all ests: bon; aie, the ou ce cest it isntust that? sjxception.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et the operations, when in place or can be removed as we have said, are to purge the patient of black bile once; then make a bandage if there is apparent repletion, and prepare the site with an even level for the operation; then pour on your unguents or cancer oil, and cover all hair and bone parts without leaving anything behind; let it heal completely, and press firmly to extract blood onto your hand or something else, and if bleeding occurs contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is closed; then perform another treatment until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	Dropsy (edema)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	Eclites.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Place your hands under the patient's armpits, and have the assistant press the abdomen towards the lower part of the belly, then take a spatula with pointed ends as follows: And it should be sharp at two points, but not so that it can reach the intestines when inserted.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then check if dropsy has started towards the intestines: If necessary, make an incision above the elbow with three straight cuts from top to bottom; and if dropsy is due to liver disease, make the incisions on the left side of the bend with three cuts; and if it's a tumor, make them on the right side, ensuring that fluids do not flow towards a weak area where they lie.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then cut through the skin with your instrument and tie it off, then hold your hand steady while scraping as much of the spatula between the skin and fat similar to peeling a nail or so; then puncture until you reach the eighth vein, this is where the blood gathers, and then drain it out using this instrument which has the following shape: And it's like a silver needle that's subtle, made of iron or brass, with one small hole in front; and on its side there are 3 holes; and on each side, 2 more holes, and another one at the bottom. The head is shaped as if a quill, and this is how authors carve a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the head above is the alveolus, so when there is expansion to the liquid, they descend onto the instrument; drain the majority or third part, for if you drain more than necessary at that time, by chance it may cause death in the patient due to resolution of their spirit from the weapon, where he vomits blood, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But drain according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the conditions of the patient's spirit mean, and his hairs; then touch the instrument and hold back the liquid, which is now retained by the opening that I have spoken about through a small pouch above it; then resume the procedure with the instrument on the following day, if you see the patient suffering from this.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day, and be careful not to touch it until some liquid remains but only a little bit of fluid. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave out too much fluid, then the cure of burial or hot sand, and by sweating excessively or bathing in sunlight, and being drunk; and the cure with drying medicines until he is sane again, and cauterize above the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the liquid as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	From the blockage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never are children born who do not have any foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or it does not exist in its proper place. If necessary, within a short time, let it be pierced with a very fine instrument according to this method: then insert a thin clamp made of lead and tie it thus for three or four days; when it needs to urinate, untie the opening, allow urine flow, and then reattach; sometimes there is no need because the urine that comes out does not close the passage.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	For those whose foreskin is small, they can be treated with the lead clamp as we have mentioned, and it will grow. Those who do not naturally have a foreskin in its proper place are circumcised because no child is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis; hence, they cannot urinate until their foreskin is lifted up; and they cannot impregnate because matter cannot reach the testicles, which is an unfortunate illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The manner of the procedure is such that the patient lies on their back with elevated head and legs like the body of a pen, so that the kidneys collect urine as they should; and watch for blood flow which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a ligature to stop bleeding, then treat the wound until healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules on the genital area
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the genital area, and they have a displeasing appearance; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; thus it is necessary that you pick them out with a fine needle, then cleanse and bandage all of them, afterwards apply cotton ball soaked in Egyptian ointment to the area until healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the gonorrhoea is ill-natured, of foul color and oozing pus, it must be treated with fire cautery. When you have cut it off, if the gonorrhoea is in the head of a testicle, and part within the hair and part outside, you must remove the gonorrhoea that is inside first; and when it is closed up, treat the external portion. For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the head of the testicle is pierced, and blackness and decay occur in its place and socket; therefore it is necessary to address all those parts that are blackened and corrupted, then on the plaque with honey and ground wheat made from pomegranate peels and leeks, and treat them with other remed cuisine until they are healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	If the flow of blood persists, treat with lunar cautery in this manner: The cauterization assists in two ways together: for the flow of blood and corruption. And if the head of the testicle is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you tie or guide a plumb line to the testicle, and let urine flow from the patient; and when the hairs atop the testicle become white due to these conditions in uncircumcised men where it occurs as a wound or abscess, then it is necessary to scrape with an instrument heated to such extent that the ligatures are loosened and the head of the testicle freed from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cthat it tichs le estis verge drench and ce les s testicle; siqu’et es. Lun la plur, il l’en lunette of the eie in toilet le choses de moient ansi que tu escorner et li almet the chieflye a n’al. Si qu’il estriestrieux de la lessei lune ce testicle; et ieue telle iust that il ne c si plues, puis ils est par s, and d testiset an le tein escorps itesque le verie of the chiern desile. 1, l’lura chief de la m eie le cervide li gist.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not necessarily a continuation of other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our own will, especially in children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest to heal work.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the majority of masters and advisors who performed circumcision before one year old, and with strength, and at all times; there was a rule because it had two parts, and by chance a cover could be put over one part while leaving the other exposed.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	So it is regained and the pain doubles, and in the healing which is half done, the tip of the limb is not assured; and in the trimming of the nail by chance it escapes from iron, and worms appear on the wound, and many times they arise thus there being no need for further healing and I have witnessed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In the healing process using force, throughout all parts of the wound I have found the goodness of experimentation, as forces trim evenly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Because when you press your hand, trimming evenly throughout the wound; but ensure the thread is well straightened around the skin. The way with the first treatment should be such that it makes a child think if he understands, that you're just tying the thread around the shaft and then making him lie in all possible positions.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you make it stand upright with your hands, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so the child does not see them or any strain; then put your hand on the rod and blow or shout, and pull it up until the head of the rod is straight; then cleanse well from the filth that has accumulated, then tie the joint firmly with a double thread, then tie below to another point; and secure with two knots at the second tied area near the pouchet and index finger, weaving between the two ties, then release your grip above hastily and straighten the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood clot little by little, as it is a delicate matter; and apply powder above and below with a pouch sealed with a half egg cooked without salt mixed with rose water, beaten with good rosemary oil and fresh, and leave it until the next day, and treat with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the strength in cleansing is this: both eyes should be kept and be sharp, and the eyelids are as equal as a comb.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of inflammeback occurs when the core within escapes from the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your nail, so that the outer makes an abscess; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold by your nail, then with tweezers you take hold of it, and then cover.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they transgress three days, and that which is from the shaft is swollen, let it be until the abscess is soothed; gently scrape off, cover as you move, and protect the area near the shaft, doing no harm at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the sudden wound of powder we have discussed in treating powders, and if it is covered too much, and it goes beyond, causing no harm; treat as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stones, frozen blood, bowel, or similar things, as we have mentioned in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not drained out, and you see that the retention is due to a stone lodged in the urethra or at the neck of the bladaderamaintenance. The patient should be bent over on their knees; place their feet on the back and stretch their belly upward from behind, and restrict their waist as much as they can; then constrain the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that urine drains out.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	* (a the text by .
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	The manner of urine discharge is to take a double thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton at its end, then insert the chief into the syringe. Trim any excess wool and fit it snugly up to the top of the syringe; afterwards grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and use oil soaked in urine, olive oil, and water to lubricate the bladder and penis.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, reaching as far as the base of the penis, then wrap the penis around with its sheath; then insert the saturated end to the bladader and let the patient feel it filling up until empty, because this is not done in accordance with this order due to the direction it goes being twisted; gradually remove thread by a little piece at a time, allowing urine to follow, then extract the remaining fluid.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient be relieved of discomfort.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapes or blood flow into the bladder, with putrefaction present, and you see to distill waters and medicines, make use of all the instrument called "Clepsydra," which is as follows:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and has .iii. flaps: two on one side and one on the other as you see fit; and the opening above which the medicine channels are cut properly to allow for urine flow without addition, so that we can drain moisture if necessary, and insert as required.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	s. If you (et, l'ko; t, but n:
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	This is the form of the subtle suppository used to treat the bladder: here it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher; from there the threads come out through one ear; then take an animal bladder (of a sheep) and insert the moisture intended for clitorization. Then tie the two sides formed by a good double thread, heat the mixture over fire; then place the top of the suppository into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladeroid as soon as all the moisture is introduced to it until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, then pierce it roundly all over; then insert a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one would assemble leather, and put inside what you intend to use oil and moisture and water, and bind it with the instrument; and do so as if you had made from the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture reaches the vessel.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction and together with medicines; and we've explained the difference between stones incited by rain, all signs, and where one must work on cutting size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones incited by the bladwalnuts are more common in children and it's a sign that the water flow of the bladder resembles to clear urine due to its subtlety; and there is also sand, and roughness the male experiences burning sensation in his penis, and he often empties it, then strains; and with these voiding episodes, they undermine their foundations; and children's treatment is relatively light until they are 4 years old, but it becomes very difficult in elderly people, being moderate for those who fall between young adulthood and middle age; and the cure is easier for those with large stones compared to those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema for evacuating all feces that are in the intestines. For they often cause an obstruction.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the thighs and stand them upright, tilting downwards until the bladder descends to the front of the pubic area, sometimes even high up. Next, make the patient sit between your hands arranged accordingly, with their hands below their thighs so that the bladeback
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if you feel the bladder in that space, hurry to cut it above. If it does not come out completely when touched all over, grease your left index finger with oil from your hand and push into the base of the bladeroffspring or middle toe if the patient is young; then press into its foundation, feel for the bladder, and once you sense it on your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then squeeze above your finger, pressing in any direction where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instructs the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tells him to stretch out with his right hand the tendons at the top, and remove the skin that is below the tendons in the area where the incision is made; then he inserts the cauterizing spatula fully:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between those who are between the tendons and the foundation, neither too much nor too little on the left side of the groin; then be straight above the stone, and turn your toes inwards or outwards towards the heel, and widen it so that if wide enough at the front but narrow inside according to the quantity of the stone, not too large:
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And occasionally press the foot that is at or near the heel so it bends easily without effort; and know that there may be stones with corners, and edges: if they are loose to come out; and some parts like a gland, round, whose exit is easy. :
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	If the shoulder has edges and borders, make the incision larger; if it does not open, you must widen the gap with pincers that are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so it cannot escape; or place over the bone an instrument shaped subtly curved at the top; and if you cannot manage this way, make a small hole in the skin, then insert the tube of vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	If there are multiple stones, first extract the largest from the bladder neck, then below it, then the midpiece, and the small ones afterward if there are more. And if they are very large, let them be sawn, making a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: death or urine leaks through where suturing is not possible; however, strive with milking or using pincangs, until you extract it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And once you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and tie it up, then place a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water to cool any inflamed abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, without loosening the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the place is greatly soothed by oil and water, then treat with the final dafinic ointment and basilic ointment until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses and erosions come into the wound, and blood congeals in the bladder causing urine retention, which is known to flow without a stream with urine: so apply your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladnary will corrode, and the kidneys may be affected.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then cleanse the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and aid in all ways you know how until healed; it is proper that for all arrows you treat, you bind the two thighs together, and apply medicines on the site of injury.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	If the stone is small and it is led from the gland, and inserted thusly, preventing urine from issuing; for treating as I have described above, you must dilate multiple times with this treatment method. I have experienced this thusly.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron stake in the shape described and form it at three angled points into one piece of wood.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a wire and wrap it around the gland near the stone so that it cannot reach back into the bladaturdearcheerly, until it reaches the stone. Turn the stake in your hand against the stone slowly, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; urine will come out soon after, then press your hand above what remains of the stone that is inside the gland. It is immediately broken apart, and comes out forcefully with the urine, relieving the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you are unable to do this due to any obstacle, take a thread under the stone and another over it, then make the rod touch at the point between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, loosen the ligature, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and care for it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	In women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There are times when stones occur in women, and if it happens frequently, then the treatment is difficult for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and another is that one cannot find a woman who knows well enough to undress before mirrors, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is such that sometimes one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's womb is more embedded than the man's, so it requires making a deeper incision with great caution due to fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to remove this, you must choose a very skilled midwife and do so quickly, and if you cannot find one, then there should be a wise and subtle doctor present who knows something about women's health or a woman knowledgeable in part of the art, and he commands her to perform the stone removal as instructed.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And you must look very closely to see if the woman is a virgin: then she should push her hips or fundament and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it down from its place, and recommend that she insert her hips or clench her left hand over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she is outwardly bent, it is necessary to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder upwards until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut around the bone at the root of the thigh opposite the hollow of the knee where it becomes disjointed, and feels the bone in that area; do not move its head above or below the bone, but let the flesh heal first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then insert the rod into the thigh; if you feel the bone and cannot easily remove it while adjusting the wound, know that there are many ways to deal with bones: they can be small or large, sharp or blunt, long or round, with ridges; understand these types for knowing how to address them.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the bone does not yield, then apply broiled vitriol at that spot and leave it for an hour until it is numb; then return to your work, until the bone feels solid, and take the tinctures I have told you about in the extraction of the bone from dogs to help you with your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the blood does not stop, and it is from an artery that has been severed, apply powder to the area and tighten bandages and bindings, without attempting again, leave the wound alone unless the patient dies by chance, then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood is calmed and the limb restores, return to your work as long as the bone remains strong.
de hernie carnouse	In case of an inguinal hernia:
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Refreshing is nothing but a collection of moisture or fat, which lies below the surface of the joints that contain the vein; and it's called "fascitis," and never properly in the tissue of the vein, as one might think it to be another type. And it's the leather between the white fascitis we have mentioned; and this does not occur at all.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	The generation of this refreshing is due to weakness in the joints, and it spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	It never comes from impact on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it appears pale like jaundice, or without redness, black, or very white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	These are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is as we have described, white and pus-filled, then the abscesses are long and thin like an egg's shape, and they do not open at the head, because they are entirely moistened.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it is moist in the proper cloth, then the abscesses are long and thin with a part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the head and the white pus, then it smells quite good; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, apply your entire finger there, from which its shape can be seen beforehand.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the intermission, judge as it is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be as healthy as possible and well-nourished in body; then let him lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and place a lot of cloths underneath him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then have the patient lie on his left side, and command the assistant that he sits to the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the groin area;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	. If youre
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then puncture the armpit fully with water through a large hole and drain all the liquid, then place the ligatures, and extend the skin upwards; do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the skin. Sever it completely or in pieces as evenly as possible from its subtle edge, ensuring you cut it securely; otherwise, fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the vein bursts during your work, when you have completed the task of the armpit; then join the two parts of the ribcage with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the vein to be corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are dilated, suspecting blood loss; then cut off the rib at all of its suspensory attachments, and drain the vein, and treat as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	When the bone is joined in two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; if you have set one part like the first equally, then drain any blood and apply a linen soaked in oil to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another bandage soaked in wine and oil over it, and put on two cloths, then cover with doubled layers of fabric, tying them together according to this method.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two more cloths and cut them with ragged fabric according to this pattern, sewing them together at the waistband of the breeches. One piece should go from underfoot up to the back, while the other goes around the arm's crook. The third piece covers both forearms, all tied securely in a loop inside the braies.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	Et never is this branch of fire-cautery used in place of iron needle, and you must take a subtle cauterizing tool called cultellary, and cover the leather pouches, and heat them as we have said, so that the white syphilitic fluid contained within becomes uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this method, and puncture the white syphilitic sore with its nodes, and apply the heat from this subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cover it in all ways you can, until everything is scraped off; and ensure the flame does not touch the wool. Know that this work is more healing; and keep an eye on the blood flow from incision, and be cautious to prevent any bleeding while cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	If any contrary thing occurs, such as an abscess or blood flow or other matter, treat that which causes the contrariness, according to what has been previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the sick person is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horrific nature, perform a perforation as I have instructed you, but only when you are well convinced by the meanings we have stated that it is necessary.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If the patient is seated on a raised seat; then make an incision in the area below and across the entire swelling, placing the perforation as long as possible along the body, and leave large openings so that all fluids may flow freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton over the wound, bind it, and allow for the remaining moisture to be absorbed; then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the gauze bandage does not allow moisture to drain from the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a straw or instrument used in treating urinary issues as described earlier; and slightly enlarge the wound so that moisture can return, typically within 40-50 days. When assembled again as before, this will pass over time for the patient's wellbeing.
de l’aposteme des coions	For abscesses in haemorrhoidal tissues
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	In this part of the treatise on this branch there are various conditions causing fear in many, which I believe should be left untouched.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the treatment and nature of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in joints; this happens quite often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	le t their ciles they dont, so that s thatch er: knottad f.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	The color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body's flesh; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it is a frightening and painful abscess with an ominous color, and does not come from our arteries or vein inflammation:
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	tostrange:
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is not necessary for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	The one who is afflicted with venereal disease is known for their condition in the expression of being touched by the fingers on the joints.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can well perform circumcision upon this sign, as well as upon other bodily marks or stigmas;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you cut the head of the clavicle, then raise the joint above, and tie off the vein white band, and free the suspended part from all around the limb.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the joint is already settled with these scars, then it is necessary that you treat the joint, and cut.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is hard on the vein or inside that which is in the vessels, it is necessary to release all of this vessel, and cut roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the humerus is where it lies behind, one must completely sever and extract the nerve, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are completed, you dress the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedeby until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	For abscesses caused by gout
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an encapsulated abscess surrounded by wrapping similar to a boil, with the softening of pus.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	And if the patient moves suddenly causing pain when they go about.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this illness is as dangerous as the one before it in terms of fear.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	for a; and other the te t c le bien:
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you have the patient sit on a raised seat, then apply the supporting strap over their shoulders and onto your own hips.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	To all the bandage that is close to the thigh, and then wrap it around his masters' fingers, and extend them fully.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut a slit in the spatula with a sharp blade across where all the vessels are, leaving it bare until they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	by ue t; That's s to; Then, which c and if the vost oue, but neither lawme.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then you insert a needle where it is required, using a piece of double thread, and tie it at the first spot where the blood flows, then securely bind to the opposite end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then wrap with bandages straight, according to the length of the body, and treat any corrupted sores;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as you would other boils, ensuring that none of the vessels bleed or continue to do so in any part of the limb.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	the lu 1.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the bone loses its nourishment due to cutting tendons, they become dry and cannot be healed.
de la routure dou syfac	From the secretion of the snake.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The secretion of the disease is caused by sore infection or lesions.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	This procedure involves either the sacrum or its extension, and come from these two methods of many causes: by impact, by jump, by shouting, by lifting a heavy burden, and similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it's an extension of the sacrum occur gradually and over long periods, not suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The abscesses are equal up to the front because the sacrum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the sphincter, which causes sudden pain at first and various abscesses appearing near the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body part affected by the sphincter dysfunction.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And it never descends the bile with the intestine, and is retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron that cause fear, one must be rid of them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of treatment is to command the patient to relocate the intestine into its place within the wound if it can be pushed back in.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then support his neck between your hands and lift the thighs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then iste les de son li is not that.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert into the ribs of the waist hooked ones as needed to open the wound, and they should be such that the bones allow for passage.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the fascia that is below the skin of the calf, as long as the white fascia remains exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then insert your index finger into the area where it supports the calf, between the white fascia that is below the skin of the shin and between the second fascia.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	the b (t. What t small s; and that cgeau ce conttlaze it by. The
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And commands the minister to extend the elbow upward, and loosen what is behind the joint.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	The morsure sus les pierre perforations on the mouth is white with holes and if thou dost not put anything.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine wires, and insert it into the rear part near the sacrum, which is after the tailbone; then cut the sinews that are seen from the threads until there are four threads remaining.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and bind the sacrum, which we have said is above the tailbone, with two strong ligatures.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the sinews with threads and tie them firmly with two parts, so that no vessels that supply blood cannot enter into you, causing an abscess.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And then apply the ligature according to the first joint long two fingers wide; and after these two ligatures leave the sack which is below the head of the knee, as large as a thumb.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and afterwards the other according to its roundness that it carries; then cut into the part which is below the skin of the knee so that it fits snugly, and the bowl, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then prepare lin thread in oil, and apply to wounds, and fasten the ligature that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time are the facial hairs cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it changes by itself; and if it is slow to dry, raise with warm water as we have said, until it dries.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then care for the wound of another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	et les. And m the l's:
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this treatment, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said it is done as if joining the joints like a hinge, after making a cut near the bone lightly on both sides.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then open the cut, and treat the abscess from which it works, until the joints bleed; and heal as we have said, until it is sound again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	in line: ould. The same the answer: with it and they do not said them t (doze d.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And if it remains too long at this point, it creates a wound or hernia until the intestines protrude.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this occurs due to the extension of hernia at the edges, as we have said, because it is extended and then softened and inflated both outwardly and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment is through fire cauterization, as we have previously stated; and it is never treated with iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then bandage the wound with a pad inflated to the size of three eggs;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the sphincter which is outside the skin near it, then take the probe and place it on the wound next to the sphincter.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two openings near the sphincter on either side of the probe's tip, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the skull from the neck, and cover nothing over the sac or extend any other thing, as I have shown you in the treatment of the bandage for intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then proceed with wound care. And when you bind the threads, if it becomes infected and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sac is restricted, and has no appearance in the route, and the fire cautery becomes loose at this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From the softening of the leather thongs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the thongs is softened in certain people because the wheels that are within them become softened and sweat; and when one wishes to cleanse it, one makes the patient lie on their back with the coat beneath them, and cuts off the softened leather from the natural skin; then join the two edges into a seam, and as you see first remove the excess softened leather in three or four firm stitches; then clip between the stitches, and cure it as other wounds until it is healthy again, and let him sweat.
dou chastrement	From the breaking of
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Dislocation is mentioned in our law and I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; however, there are two reasons why it's necessary: one is so that the physician can respond with treatment when asked, and the other because we often need the castration of certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and others. Therefore, I say that dislocation is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method where we do it by attraction, make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and swolamo
des hermofrodites	Hermaphroditism is a condition present within our discussions; yet I choose to exclude its comprehensive elaboration from this text. Nonetheless, two imperatives necessitate its mention: the first being for physician's prepared response upon inquiry regarding treatment and the second deriving from frequent requirements of animal castrations which serve in aiding us - including but not limited to goats, sheep, rabbits, etc. Consequently, it is stated that dislocation procedures are executed via dual methodologies: attraction or incision. Under the attraction technique protocol, immerse the creature within heated aqua until testicular softening and tumescence occur; subsequently apply pressure with your left hand to ensure realignment until sensation returns to baseline post-intervention.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	.ijung femmen: the arse est d :h bien sizest a l’opercuit. The les mimesi toi, maistres-lue ce que maniere avons. Dilimnus des ame et ; li chieres qui cuis pricked; ands de cess (li coit de est une l'exerc:
de la tentigene	From strain or tension
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tension is a swelling close to the natural part and it is too unsightly; and some women have as much of it as one hand, and that's the cause. It must be dealt with by gently pressing down on the excess tension in your hands or joints, without applying pressure directly from above, so as not to trigger bleeding, then treating any other injuries until they are healed; and if there is another swelling at the base of a tooth, and it's filled with pus, and perhaps burst suddenly, and resembles an ulcer, and because of this they called in ancient times "ulcerous disease". If it needs to be pressed down on, do so as we have said for tension, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratic stones are those that move or fall from their place without apparent cause; they can bring misfortune or illness according to the beliefs of some people at the time this text was written.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	If ectopic is when the nature of woman's body does not penetrate fully, or her passage is small; and it is innate by birth, or incidental due to illness that has come upon her; or it occurs through close contact, or by a subtle leech or insect, and forms completely within the uterus, or in the groin, or elsewhere, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and possibly bearing children. Knowledge of this is gained by observation of her menstrual cycle. If there are signs of bleeding nearby, approach with your two fingers or thumbs. If it is due to a subtle leech, and it appears in the two-week period, hurry, and find them like so: place your index and middle fingers together, and the woman should lie on her back with legs spread; then extend both fingers fully until the subtle leech emerges, and stop at the site of bleeding. Then take wool, and boil it in oil, and apply to the area, gently massaging each day so that they cannot unite. And if the leech is hard and abundant, then you must perform a procedure similar to fumigation with myrtle leaves. If bleeding occurs due to childbirth, support at the vulva and provide care; and use blood-fortifying medicines such as dragon's blood, incense, in combination with frankincense in abundance; then prepare a wide plank so that the wound cannot close; continue this process for an extended period, and apply a linen bandage. Then proceed to other treatments until healed. And when bleeding occurs from the vagina due to childbirth, it should be treated according to these instructions unless there are advanced abscesses. For with infected abscesses in the vulva, one must not touch them at all.
des emorroides	Here comes the translation of the text:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Morning sickness is onset of veins which are not customary, and when morning sicknss becomes old it turns to ulcers; and we have already discussed in the division their appearances, signs, and symptoms, and now I will mention those that respond to cure. I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, if they are fully within the rectum and do not appear on touching, can only be healed with iron. Those at the mouth of the rectum can be felt, and thus can be cured. Therefore it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then extend the hemorrhoids with forceps, and pull them out from their roots; and apply powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood resin and incense, among other things; then put her feet into boiling water for an hour, then place in cold water. If there is bleeding, it comes with a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate rinds, hawthorn berries, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix with honey and oil to form a paste, and make a linen poultice on her back. If this is effective, it's good; if not, apply bladder-like veinous pouches on the back and near the genitals without ironing; then take flax, and milk into juice of plantain or goosefoot with wine, and make poultices at the site. And when the abscess is healed, use ointment until it is healthy again; and those called "albatros" are red, have a rough surface like an ulcer, so cover as I mentioned before for hemorrhoids; then cure until it is healthy again.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the rectum
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	sonttera andhe (sse:t;le. Chest:ridoze saura. What. Anderaise the mainezrelemforsme Qustantv;sso t orstrie
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The first skill in childbirth is for her to know the natural figure of childbearing and the signs when you see a woman rush to labor, wanting to smell urine: then hurry that the baby comes forth; thus it's known that such childbearings are according to the natural figure, and there will be an issue from under her head, with twin birth alongside; and when you see these signs, one must gently press her belly so that the baby is born quickly; for as soon as he emerges from under her head, there will also be a twin, and the brain's superfluities are well expelled through good cleansing; but this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes occurs upon its feet, and powerfully the body or head, with hands that come on her belly or soot, and is turned by chance about her neck, and in other ugly figures; therefore skillful at childbirth must be clever and subtle in these matters, and free from error and deceit, and I will show you all the forms as to how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes out from under her head naturally and the woman labors vigorpertly, and the vitality of the child is weak, then make her sit on a stool or holders carry her; and let nature's oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then put the midwife between his thumbs the small spatula in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And split the second metacarpal as far as the moisture that is on its way; and rub the woman's abdomen until the baby descends, and if it does not descend, one must enema the woman with a muscatel solution of fenugreek mixed with oil from sesame; then apply pressure and induce vomiting for an hour: now expel the baby. And if both hands come out forcefully, they should be gently pushed back in gradually; and if they cannot re-enter, place the woman on a stool, lift her feet upwards; then stand the stool on the ground, keep the woman from straining during standing; and if the baby'cuedn't enter, and the baby has died, cut the hands at the earlier incision made in front, extract the child, and reset it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the exit of the child through its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the baby is born on his feet, one must place it upside down.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn slightly and slightly more until they are equal;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then pinch a small piece and extend it slightly and gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump up to the knees if commanded, and the condition causes sneezing;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps out, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, but turns a little at a time, until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be slightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	a me:
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	And apply this oil with its essence inside to her womanly parts, and avoid anything contrary.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then have her sit in warm water up to under the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is swollen below, give her a ball of myrrh wax and place it there, leaving it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make it sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and strain its mouth and nose, and gently press the belly, for now the child urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the release of the child at his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes to this form, then the bailiff puts his hands here and there.  (This refers to a medieval practice where a judge or other official would touch parts of the body suspected of harboring disease)
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	with thesis by saying no ce
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And he bends his hands little by little, and then presses the hands above the belly, and lifts the bones from below until they are properly aligned.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, then take its feet and move them properly, then move the belly forward, then turn his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And gently do this to the child little by little; and command the woman to nurse until the baby emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	: s, so much est m s n the cortes a se t
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It requires skillfully bringing back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be brought back, lift up the woman and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed with legs bent at the knees:
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	is not m ne bon it should be that don’s, but soign.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	If it does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to reset the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And position the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command that it suckle until the baby has grown strong.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	After childbirth on its neck, let its hands spread out and turn its face towards the mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	by:
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	When it is evened out, place the mud-like substance of wax and oil as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And once you have done that, if the patient sits on a chair and he commands it to swallow; and the patient then sneezeblows.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, perform every secondary incision
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When this comes in this manner for secondary incision, perform the secondary incision at your fingernail, until the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if a child falls on his face and neck, so that the cup of the skull is not supported, he will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then place the child within, making sure you've positioned him correctly, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	Once done, then gently stir.
de l’issue des gemelz	ça et les enfants; (t; That he la
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Galls often arise many times, and never in one occurrence there are three or four; this is not a strange thing, and it seldom happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are strange and do not live, if rarely known.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are destroyed by the flea which drives them away, which is bound to feces.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they arise quickly, follow the treatment as we have said, and be subtle in your skill, and do swiftly and lightly what is needed.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	Do so to keep them moving towards health.
de plusors enfans	Moreover, many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	; and to (and;t the the comm; this.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it is necessary for the barber to know all this, as sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	The instruction in French says: "Do as it should according to this." This seems like a directive for someone to follow certain guidelines or instructions that are not specified here. Therefore, without additional context, we cannot provide a solution. Could you please clarify what specific actions or decisions are expected based on the given phrase?
de l’enfant mort	by m and its brock�man Cognbt but en ga <brwalt. xt (pr:li; If not-ha et so prirent, puis que marche;t se et t
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When treating a woman who has lost her child or is pregnant, as I have described in the section on divisions, and if there is no flowing blood, and you are compelled to use manual therapy.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it becomes necessary that you ascertain whether the woman is in good health and has no injury or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is fitting that the woman be sound on her back, with her head tilted downward, and legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	es. The ungr??
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the dislocated arm with oil from almonds mixed with musk and fenugreek seeds, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then gently reset the dislocated arm, then wrap it with bandages or cloth as needed.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And be careful if the child is prematurely born that they do not descend onto their head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	; don's ; Jara.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if there is dislocation on the feet, where it pierces or pricks and at middle ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is proper to wash the onion with his right hand, place the pestle between the thumbs of his left hand, and gently put all his hand against it, and insert the onion in any of these ways we have said, until it empties.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	This is the form of an elbow:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then position it against another joint where you require to extract, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend evenly by moving from one side to the other in order for them to move outward, and let the joints be even so they can hold their position, as per the shape.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	that est a way heal: the other et so that the le combte t.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if none remain there, position this cuff higher or farther upward, and fold it as much as necessary until it slips off completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by gripping,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If it becomes necessary, wrap a cloth over it completely so that it is covered entirely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then apply the bandage at the joint of the sole or heel and so it is necessary to do likewise with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and troublesome at birth, or has an open skull (fontanelle),
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	igne by.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	When you place it on the instrument called "almidach," which shapes with tools or paste that follows this;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in the same way, make it so that the child has a large natural size.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones with tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	can they should'fait with variouse on their:n:  the bole (prud :0s.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot escape, cut it by parts as you move.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the abdomen or outside of the ribs, one must pierce until the fluid drains out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And healing to put the leu l'e: car it in sa peis s’est tres; and they are the fie les poignes.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	If it is painful in the belly or breast, one must wind it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and if it be dislocated from its place by any movement of his body which he makes, it should return to its position.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And if it affects the belly or breast until the moisture that is there has dried up.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	Then c le remet, est placed thatt yet other otherwise, it to the same, as much orem soi; s are ou the place de the is, they reset. And tas, and so not dose, its les places to the la moiture of li place d’autre, et youre thet and beet les, then the a.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If he thrusts his hand far up to the head of the arm, and pulls it all the way to the armpit.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he pushes a pincers or two into it, and moves them back and forth.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the head of the arm is pulled back due to a hot abscess that has arisen within it, then he should not try to treat it.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	ous for s c
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the inflamed areas are soothed and made moist with water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on their back, and you can place them evenly, arrange as we have said in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there is no power to do so, then the flesh should be cut into pieces, leaving nothing of the spine intact.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And after you have done this, if it is arranged as we have said with abscesses that come in the bones;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	. And so and the
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with child who had one dead child inside her womb, then conceived another on top of it, and expelled the other as dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After many years, an abscess came in her leg, swelling until it burst, and began causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat them, but for long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	. Po c� ;
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I have told you much, for it is such that belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I desired the wound, and in doing so touched his bone, until the woman was at her best point;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have not recorded this chapter for the reason that when masters encounter something strange, they know how to apply treatment.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Next comes the form of pressure, where one finds the books; and at two turns there are two keys to the two locks.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	line tre:m fornge in.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And may his mouth be like a staff, two fingers wide, with tree margins one finger, and long half an inch.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two joints there should be two hinge supports of the same staff, firm in both, half an inch long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two hinges are attached to the mouth of the staff for opening when one turns both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	ctirme tues by le t c the f l’tf: car u Brot:
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And it is of two shoulders with two dislocations, as you see, one inch long and two inches wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see opening the sinews with all instruments, make her sit on one bed, with arms and legs extended;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then place the two dislocations side by side on the sinews, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand with all the instruments, as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the amount you see open the mouth of the muscle, until the patient makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted in front, and there are multiple kinds of them; and the more you have prepared the mirrors, the faster the work can be done, and higher at home for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard an instrument that you have not prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the testicle is retained during childbirth, one must instruct the patient to grasp his penis and then perform an abdominal incision, and restrain both hands on his mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	If it falls through that, it's alright.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that doesn't work, take a pot and make a lid or cover, and put in herbs that could open the mouth of the wound such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, henbane, and fennel.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, whether any or some of them, boiled or placed in water over fire; then put a pestle or lid on the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mortar.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let them breathe until the steam comes out from the mortar; then make it sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If his eyes are watery, quickly dry them.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	; they.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And he who wants to perform the reduction; and when it has been found, gently pull and extend it gradually so that the muscles do not contract during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	However, one must move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come back into place and dislocate again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the bone of the muscle is protruding, we have said to treat by inducing sneezing and smoking herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	vman, so that c the ome:
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary to tie the one at the mouth of the arrow, to the thigh of the woman, then enema with ointment of four pharmacists.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If you loosen and reset it again, but it comes loose once more; however, if it smells bad in the stomach and head when released, it causes nausea to the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then perfumed smoke should be done on this: none of the old ones have tested smoking with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman for contraception, namely is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it appears to be similar to a hawk, and one places its sharp end in the region, with wide eyes near fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and it is done by smoking over coals, and the lice until they are consumed, then repeat another one.
de percier lou fondement	; sguir se faire la: heum, so that pratique. 1, et p2t; If the e te le tiguilt comme en les m togement by c. Do not the same the ne and thera ben que est they.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have true sensation at all, but whose roots are subtle threads.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it is appropriate for the healer to sense that subtle root at its right place and not just from the membrane's surface, and ensure the placement so they do not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a linen cloth in wine and oil to it, then treat with anointment until it is cleaned.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	at that you; <uence in the same If an combsul bye; t neir et m:
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	At no time does this swelling of wound or abscess occur; if it is the case with suturing: treat them as we have said in the chapter on plaits.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula at the base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are inflamed and grow larger as they develop near the foundation; or in a space of two-thirds parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is an abscess or more than one; and when that swelling is old, act upon it, and use especially cold wet or subtle bandages.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these abscesses are not permanent; and they are known by what is found or discharge or windiness when the patient makes a discharge, and sometimes in his urine some particles.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if abscesses reach the bladder and up to the middle of the penis; and they extend up to the hip joint, and up to our part of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one finds a leaking abscess at the base, not merely leaking.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you insert your finger or base and use a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula if there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	the, et the of that is li ones tost: nde f.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, nor come with pus discharge or winds or sweat as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Sweep so that it does not pierce, if you hasten with the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be remedied with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced near the hip joint, so is the tendon coming to its place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	t (t.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these perianal fistulas there is no effective remedy except for toil, and the vanity of foolish men who attempt it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are not ancient and do not have longstanding issues, there is hope for healing with iron as I have tested.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	the
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then apply a tent of linen or cotton if there is any twisting, until you know where the tent lies.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels numbness at the base, it is fitting that you place your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	. The de the a more and make the must bele so that.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If one does not skillfully treat it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	In any case, we can successfully heal some [conditions], but this occurs rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	les que are on thet MT and so they:
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	When the bottle becomes very hot in the abscess, until it approaches near the foundation; and does this two or three times, as long as you know that these shards have been cooled down, which resemble an eagle's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Then the treatment of swoln veins rubs with butter until those shards are inserted, then apply ointment soothing and binding them together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is the case, it's fine. But otherwise, there can be no other healing.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is inserted between them and does not penetrate to the bone that lies beneath, and between your thumbs and the tent one put an ample covering of wax or syphac, and you observe the fistula where the skin grows over the covering.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If from the beginning of the fistula you tie it off and place it before the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And it shall be relieved and shrinked; then remove those twisted vessels that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If the vein wins out, cut between your skin and the vessel; cauterize with fire or medicinal ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery brings together two things: that is to say, the abrasion of joined bones and the stopping of blood and drying out of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then treat frayed tendons by boiling or grinding with a mortar and pestle until they are thoroughly soaked, and let the joined bones be separated in the boiled substance.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat burns from sudden ignition by drying out the affected skin and apply healing salves to the area.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When restored, it is made whole and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from near the root of its source, and is moved away from the body, then you may bind it with bandages or foundations, and inspect it regularly.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel swelling, and between them is the bandage or gauze, or where it needs to be pierced, there should only be a way of confidence and hope through its administration with one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	by the same.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not move too forcefully, for you may injure the structure that supports the foundation, and waste comes out as it pleases.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	And then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance, if it is sound, or remove that covering and cleanse after it has been cut near the foundation, or with a probe or another instrument prepared.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then mend the proper flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula in the part forward of the foundation; if it were more easy for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	and le pas ple4; ça u the grand.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If you take a tent pierced at the top as follows:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert one bent wire in two pieces, and sew the tent throughout with all the thread until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is torn at the margin of the deep foundation, then extract that wire and sew your two pieces or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	the dextile;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And do not fasten at any time, until the children have copulated with each other, and urinate.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the boil does not burst, pierce it in all ways that you know, unless it is too large.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not necessary to perform a complete reduction if only slightly dislocated, then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the pointed spatula used to make a fistula is sharp and one-sided, with a cutting edge.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because that which should not be cut is not to be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	;
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	In various ways: some are within the foundation like resin, and there can be small and large ones, as well as blood in the veins.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and some are removed from the foundation or more than one, and they leave the foundation and reach the top of it; however, those that are removed have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and again or a bit of yellowish water or blood, and they have the color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	the numm.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hasten, and hold it with pincers or your fingernail, then wrap it tightly at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the splinters cannot be held due to their slipperiness, then grasp them with a piece of cloth or cotton, or a scrap of camlet.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract it with your fingers, then wrap it up, and sprinkle some hot powders that are in place of cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	(do-S.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	If the foundation cannot be released, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter cleansing to wash out what is at or near the base, so that it may come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When the patient leaks, and if the thread (referring to a wound) is very close to the base, then the cure is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should pick them with your fingernail or pliers, and bandage, then treat as we have said until it is healed, so that the patient fears iron incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary to suture according to this manner: take a twisted thread and put it through a needle, then pass the thread over and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn both ends of the thread away from the eye of the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it should be wide; then pull the thread tightly, knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all others, leaving some to absorb excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a lin cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest there.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it lie until they can move, and when they have healed, treat with ointment and other remedies, until they are healthy again.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Thus also the foundation of fears or illnesses.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often it happens that there are blockages in the intestines and due to natural constraints; when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	ild:930. If yout to, such as v. I're (do-flows and zeardius. But also thera s.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat as necessary until it is securely set, as required.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot be secured, start reshaping more firmly than before until the wound bleeds profusely, and then cauterize.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	.
dou fremit	By a slight movement
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A flea is a small creature found on the body, and it moves about much.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never brings coldness to the veins, but feels like death-like shivering, and comes into all the body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	isnt thatt: ougue they, and m s ecried.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to wrap around the entire pain until you grasp it entirely, and place it straight, and strengthen the trembling at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a bandage of lin or iron as in this manner, and be subtle underneath and transverse above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not feel with your hands, but hold it together and apply pressure; And if you see, cauterize the trembling, as when it is before or like a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	t et t. M: theta lign cont du C’suest que persue R f
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never has one made an enema of silver or copper, or molten wax or softened lead; and never have these small and large suppositories been prepared as prescribed for those who need them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are thus made in the treatment of children who are weak and sorrowful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of both the small and large enemas is such that they should be inserted wide, or the belly depends on this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an eversion or the belly is twisted, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and have two small openings on one side, and on the other side also two.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And the belly or intestine is filled with remedies from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced entirely through both small openings.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And between each small opening there is a space to hold the remedy, then insert through these openings a strong thread of twisted wire for about ten or more turns, and thus gather the belly as with a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medication is too dense, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema; and that's the circular shape.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or goat butter or similar substance, then pour it in gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the minister takes it with his two hands together until they are full, and extracts the enema, lifting the patient's legs off the bed.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	so ; they; by Ca; with the  (line.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you perform a clyster in case of intestinal disorder and the patient's condition worsens, and if it recurs repeatedly until healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if hemorrhoids are found or an abscess, administer the clyster as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which the skin should be tightened:
des plaies	est s; 1, either leur;
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In our discussion of wound treatment, we shall now say about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what means or types of wounds are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made include being cut by a sword or knife, or from lance, staff, arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or those that are done according to the parts of the body: as if a wound bleeds from above the neck, or the head, or the groin, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for memory shall come to your treatise.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound to the head occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from stone or similar causes, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you gently doubt the presence of an abscess: if you make a cut immediately on the head area itself, and there is blood from the wound, and it should be held to the opposite side of the affected part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And remove the impurities from the patient's body with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to be cut, then let his meat be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	by so 1 the end; thene prud siel; but also t theraustsemble (with their are.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	If there is no abscess, place it on the wound, if it is fresh and has all its blood, and not moved by air or powder, which I will say some more later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is moved, apply certain unguents until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and of similar kind, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, join them with sutures, as I will say for abdominal wounds, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone, and thin, and holds only slightly with dressing, then first treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard leather in its place.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat fatty meats, as tested with wheat cooked, and similar things like hairs.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or feel rot in the bone, and there is no connection to the bone, then dress it entirely, pour out any pus, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	If it has an artery in the wound or vein and cannot be stopped without a poultice, then no matter how much you try with remedies, if you find it dislocated, tie it off with thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, here is a light treatment: put this powder which will move the rust as well.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	by bon's  that they.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And treat the wound, and hold firmly, until it is well healed and rejoined with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then securely bandage it and allow it to heal freely, if there is no swelling; for the medicine is not removed until it is fully healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	ici: docter les soigne, the caut;t and are not le tissand done they ce quitte then the esté if you well dresse the that lest heal, to it is the times que ail n’s. And until ce et dont lesse sont they pait de the cide:
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	If the arrow has moved the wound, especially if it is embedded therein, do not apply any of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	However, apply with some digested ointments or breadcrumbs made of barley flour, water, and honey until it soaks through.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	, maisthem; but the w lest lessewounds est pliant, pour la peigne le plus or the tissage is gist of li pas que ongs et cane and it est de ou sointes sont they are a lin your. d and yout the s ome cite:
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	If the bone fracture comes with a wound, and it is small, then extract carefully using fine tweezers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And now I will tell you about fractures to the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	If you have the body, then take the mots it is as it after the wounds the poisons and sins of be them all so that l'eux in the les bleeds now tear; and do not let me tains the hand.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes at or near the neck and it is straightforward, there may be no difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins of the neck or the artery are severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the veins, there is no other remedy but to leave the dressing, and not put anything constrictive, for it harms the veins and makes them recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the veins is cold, and their extension along with the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	However, let the medicines be soaked, as hair is washed in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, and boiled in the same gentle water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other preparations of herbs according to this method, and moistened unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, then heal until it is sound.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	ons:k;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	If the arrow is lodged, and blood flow occurs, then remove it, lay it open, and if necessary, cauterization must be done.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	If the spine of the throat is lodged or a key (point), and the channel is guarded, causing the flesh to suffocate.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If it is stuck on the bone of the throat, do not affect the throat but reset according to its natural form.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	:
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	When the wound causes pressure on the bone, if you wish to do so.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are bone fragments, use all possible force to extract those that can be removed, and leave the ones you cannot remove until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	Ouvre of s is it d broken os de la l’os, tu si les bras du joint des.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there are bones within the wound and an abscess present, treat as I have described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the puncture or cut wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a puncture or cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if there are any signs of infection as they manifest in the patient's agony: understand that the wound can be fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it is not deep, and its blood is fresh throughout, do not apply the powder in the first hour, nor bind with anything that prevents the blood from flowing freely.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, causing pain for the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply soothing balm, and bandage it two times a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	by the e  (t:
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	Let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or longer; et tu l’as liés aux quatre membres a une charrette de bois par le long du bras et les deux jambes pour quil n'i puisse mie ne se muevoir.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no muscle spasm or severe body tremors from weakness in the neck; et fai coucher le malaide sus lour pereceaux par les deux mains.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see that the bone is in position again, so you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Cure yourself with bandages and other remedies until you are healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	The li os est les membronts tus estes, quis istrest sont es:
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple or on the back, treat as with that which is before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is large, bandage; and if it's small, with powder, and if it's pressed into the bone, with broken fragments taken out, treat the wound and remove any foreign objects if present.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not removed, let the wound heal, but lighten the extraction of debris.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other injuries to other limbs, there is judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Regarding the rupture of the abdomen.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	leave orner.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a large wound, blood does not flow at any time into the intestines or their nerves, causing an intrusion of pus.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and cauterization is more difficult to perform, and it never worsens a small wound compared to a large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	for this is why you must often reset the intestines if they are not set back hot by hot.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	line them ct. If, which doesnt t; and nothing is a grosse de la peud:
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because it is necessary to move the injured flesh, so that when resetting it moves back into its proper place like the other two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that abdominal surgery has four methods.
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	There are two common types of suturing in the abdomen,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	theta. The b; car
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And indeed they are more suited with a stitch on the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing from the intestines out.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	in, and so quits as et crop out the ou est de comme eau la scours on. SATOR they esprent les point ce.
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	Or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	A soft sponge or a piece of cloth soaked in fresh water solely
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or boil in fresh water with salt and pepper.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And let the intestines swell as much as they are filled.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never is it done with such constraint, but must be loosened to allow expansion.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling begin to break apart, if the intestines are soft from water or have become thin and weak,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for thus is the entrance joined by little substance.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	et les jambes du malaid sont a l’estre; Et la main del malaid soit en sa place, et le col del malaid soit alignez.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that none should cut it without great necessity or need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the incision for splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	so that s:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	When the wound is expanded, and the internal organs rupture.
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If the arrowhead is reset according to its natural form in its original place.
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you can manage it, because this involves movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	the first line: ous;k ben:
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	If it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	And raise its legs higher than its head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the abdomen,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If you place the head and buttocks higher than the lower parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And similarly, if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two areas.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	Then align so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	any f ete that they:
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds use what has been prepared for you
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then take in your hands the pious servant who will comb through the entire gash with his hand.
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the edges;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	by.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	et il doit être longue d'au moins deux doigts pour assurer une tenue ferme; Et si le membre est grosseur, choisissez une aiguille proportionnelle.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave two spaces from the edge of the wound and insert a needle with strong thread through it.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce both shoulders with two leather straps on either side.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	Comcorrig;
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	And unite the two heads of the shoulder bone, bringing them together at four points;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then strain a double thread through both eyes of the needle for sewing;
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then promptly join together the two edges of the wound;
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then leave a space of two fingers, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	Then tie off the thread as you did with the first needle.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	And continue to do so according to your need for more needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	As long as all the wound is restricted;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	And they become half-moons, both fine and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles cover the entire chariot, and those too large cannot enter well at all:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	It is necessary for them to be set aright;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	And one should not insert needles too far from the bone and into the skin;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they do not reopen wounds before the incision.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	Then bind the head of the dislocation so it does not bend and bother the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And place bands or cloths on the dislocated head to keep it immobilized.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave it until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	fir t-tium by them; they: ZCobjour se ne va ze su que les mort. The possible; the ou nolzents.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	For this, you have inserted a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitching method is common.
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you join the two heads of skin with an eye needle, using strong thread or medium thickness.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	by: la pek espouse so.
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the dislocation at the part where you began, in the manner of how one sews garments.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and make space between each stitch as thick as a small finger.
ceste costure sevent li home,	these stitches secure the wound,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	; dont tu form and s to ce est lesse as le Tres la they pruch kum: the same:m de pas; although for by a.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	Who was tormented by a knife.
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and had a wound more than one palm wide of great size.
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and there were the intestines opened to a width of two large palms.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	they do not be done are the tiss. Then comment is to issue any: all s nothing mais que la ou ones. The c none, ift m and cannot be so, like.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned his intestines after it had been out for twenty-four hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	And the wound was closed until fifteen days, and healed by treatment, becoming well again.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, but it turned out to be a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And I did not apply ointment to it, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And I placed without fail twice a day on the wound, clean linen cloth and washed it with honey water until healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Here is how you will say the two proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	the main and to. The line by d a t, so that he said: any trement de the m. If you cannot they that t f:
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has perceived the head straight on, then lay the wound from where you stuck or inserted the needle.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and pierce through to the inner part until reaching that distance further.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitching is that you cut as a furrier would with furs,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And let one leave the sinew of one side, and take it again from another, until the stitching is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, which Galien describes properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If they are such that they naturally unite as one, like the two halves of a broken bone. In this situation, once proper alignment has been restored by skilled hands, there is no need for stitching or binding with bandages. Instead, these separated pieces will rejoin spontaneously and heal themselves in time, much like how natural elements may come together to form one coherent whole when under the right conditions.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	And they apply one of the heads to the other head, in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Pierce an arrowhead or nearby bone, and make that cut only slightly.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And leave the two heads of the sica.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	:nge de chollemant quet in ane à bele; and head.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	As there are two dislocated shoulders;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make a percutation of each one from the part further up to that inside, in two other shoulders like mirrors that are opposite sides.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the manner of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	so that m;t:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must sew the belly to two needles with thread on each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must insert one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And know that when the pus is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	: and muste s (1 tire sofait.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is such that when you find a fresh wound with all its blood, as if the archer has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If you reset an intestinal dislocation, and its course; then place upon it powder of wormwood.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the flesh has moved, then apply any salve that is available until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And trim the hairs, and make them soft, and let it bleed slightly;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	iaus is any they de de. If they should be to ce;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no remedies, then apply as soon as it begins to tremble, cotton wool.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And stir it two times a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For infections, and bezo d'autres the wound as other remedy is more than tenement d’artisinest they can arise by a bach.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	Et si vous doutez que la plaie fasse communité aux principaux membres
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	And if it is necessary to grind the flesh lightly with oil of tar, or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it within the joints, and above the elbows;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	de:
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If black wine enemas are used too much, especially when it reaches up to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and perforates any abscesses, and drains them in such a way that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cleanse than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	If there are les petites sanz if you do not heal and li lez de la pains saner are large as easy it is to be taken in the fistula.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is because of the weakness of veins that they are so, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness to its own nature's nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if an arrow falls from the wound, reset it as before with the intestines while they are fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is old and has turned brown or black, then you must wrap the area that is black to prevent bleeding.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	-b; don'tstf ;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	Then cover the area between the joints
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And place two keys hanging from the part above the wound downwards to ease arrow extraction when the shaft breaks, and the wound bulges.
de la routure dou boueil	From the procedure of treating a swelling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	sud ;fait; you may be not too d: M.se a:
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored in some people,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I see that some men have been troubled by an arrow in their stomach;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it was infected and became a fistula, leading to discharge and inflammation.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment as best I could, and continued with subtle manipulations until it was restored to health and the joints were solidified.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And thereupon be not soothing they healed, as though I did heal it should occur and recovery was made.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	And there is no harm, but remains in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take clean gauze or linens, then gather the edges of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when the tremor has opened the mouth, it is placed on both lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	If it is drawn back into its mouth above;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	then he covers his head, and this is kept so that it cannot slip off,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then apply another bandage as before, until the wound is fully closed;
et cout la plaie.	And let it heal.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	Those who cut into internal organs do not harm the patient in any way.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	c which:
en teil maniere:	When done thus:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	In this manner: take the head of this intestinal string so that it is thoroughly cleaned.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then fasten to the top of this thread a subtle twisted flax thread.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	the text is correct that cane est:
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this manner of stitching from fresh wounds is not different than according to the method of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	un it; the most they c:he; In this that does say I.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	When it rises up and returns to its place.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And an abscess is the result of improper vein formation that is hard and pale, where there is no pain felt.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it also grows like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	they are not: ſt est.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	At no time slight, and at other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken in the section on wounds, that any wound not treated will become infected.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is due to one of these seven reasons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	the stie ile que esttet, et lium: ous:
ou por sa malice;	Or because of its malignity;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there are hard spots within, and on the lips, do not allow any hair to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or where there is too much growth of armpit hair.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	When the bone is fractured, and the material is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	when the medicine is not properly prepared for treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because this contamination takes on a form similar to plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	byt and so (s, then:
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	When there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have previously shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in the section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	I dont he wrote ond ans, then, et lis ine lacks de de d.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	Because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	In the scrotum, in the intestines, in the bladard, or any of the ribs.
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	On the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the principal property of the limb, and similar parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind have difficult healing, and there is only hard work and ignorance involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	the patient; OX that line ;t; the p'i (1e the same: so :z. Tad: 20 have the following thems tome to-na and name it eusle le ourible in context.
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you shall recognize it, then take a tent of wool or iron if the fistula is straight, choose one.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, search for a fine tent (tentacle) of thread.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the threads bend near the twist;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	l’d the c sis: they, and scader; que lesse t'fors, or gaies est to-to ce malest ke ti.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	If cleansed by one of the tubes (or channels)
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because moisture comes from one tube to another, and it purifies.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you should seek a proper remedy in your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve involved, and it rises from within.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	the w:
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	When you know for certain where it is located, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	in any of the cases I have told you, if the treatment according to what I have said,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the other bones and corrupted joints that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment until it is healed.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well deep in the right place, one must cut into it from the beginning as much as possible.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I apply moldy medicines with a fever, and insert them up to the top of the faster-growing part of the body.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	they beau:
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then apply healing unguents to clean wounds until they are healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it does not heal by this method, then you may proceed to cauterize as we have said;
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is compromised by the abscess, do not hesitate to amputate it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves trouble you or principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness until the king's order has consumed all the bone.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	est as heulet them bonde, that sonis a: it soies, et, you may be its d diez lesme to doe stombe or in li oum. And tont and l’ovre the oment is allt, but not s ton de la meunus est, and;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	If it is not securely fixed, and returns as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	Say that you are not yet able to go near the fire:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If it reveals and rises as far as when you reach the bottom.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And remove all decay, then reset to its original position;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it becomes so healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	èt movements as de lits and est ; puis taie lese they ouso: the is pricked then eul; but so;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other remedy than using a ligament by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if there is a small decayed bone, and you can pull it out with pincers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If you extract it with an instrument that is appropriate for this,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is any bone, do not leave even one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture causes the opposite effect, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if heat and moisture and cold are present, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	is to do:
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	And let it stay until the joint is reconnected near the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	then afterwards they will have the bones more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, like that of a leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	.
puis restoure la plaie;	Then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of the corrupted bone, and it approaches near the surface of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If the necessity is to cut and remove all up to the infection, then heal it until it is sound:
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a case of an abscess which occurred in one's leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you wish for an example and assistance in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a youth (within thirty years), who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	While materials reached to the leg and was drawn from a large abscess without needing to be opened.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the doctor by their madness worked until they opened up the abscesses.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and from it they drew out a lot of material, which became a fistula, and much pus came that all the pores emitted sweat and moisture throughout the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	s. That soffer la mort le; Do not that heu e est: Thea les theym cautione the t a dur C't.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	As long as I am called upon, and see his leg and the remedies with which it was treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and those that are needed through punctures into large bodies.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body became red as in youth, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	line tey med:
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that one comes against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I did my best, and examined in one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it corrupted and felt its presence, and the corruption reached up to the inner bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	the same:
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And begin to heal the wound with soda remedies for long periods of time, and cannot be soldered.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	And then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	the c s. I1 ;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	However, I could not move as much as when grasping near the bone of the hand, and it broke away completely.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then it was restored with medicines; and soon healed quickly and soundly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and no longer resumed the treatment except due to the patient's weakness who could not bear it,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	:
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For evacuating blood often causes pain, but he was completely healed.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And there arose in its place a hard scar, which was of good shape and had no harm or hindrance at all, neither to movement nor approach.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	Then take you well-opportune les bout l’es. And then gloires de the maint and of the is not move them; ne lign debonturse coure on the same. The first to be noir et they, t can le ure dite este oint paris pas too longet, quire li m ou crossoit se vaiuds.
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take one ligament, and stretch it at the head of the bone where there is an opening.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct that no one should extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another thicker band of flesh alongside the first ligament, and tie it over the bone that is below it.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	with attir:
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And open the joint where you see it separated, ensuring that the bone does not cut through the flesh.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a splint or a stick beside the bone to support the fractured joint;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it should be treated as long as one can see and feel the decay, and even more frequently.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	it is s:
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If disclosed is the entire joint; then place a peg underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then it is the spread from one part to another of the infection, and there should be taken a piece as long as the extent of the infection; just as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	or and is healing should be put s’en it est done of the a peas, puis after les parties then the from dose cautere aviriongule. 9020. C.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the inflammation is found along the two joints, there are no other remedies but to use heat.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the inflammation is in the fingers of the hand or foot, it is a very strong thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	But still it is necessary to inquire about the erosion, how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but let the vein or nerve not oppose you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the saws and files for cutting bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason, one must equip each kind of work with its appropriate instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that your hand will reveal to you the instrument you need according to your knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	Or for the cap de vous les poilz que tu est du l’ovrage, curet and li teuillirant the as long as pendent oure la par exemple avient to that you must be made, tue le art de.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you think of the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	From fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may rot or become dislocated due to pressure, or because it is not well placed.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	When you have applied the remedy for corrosion through medical treatment, but they do not benefit.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	If it is necessary to cover that limb up to its original place or where the ulceration occurs.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	d are not teues a l’ovrir the et eue and have to t les medecure des le do that the f, and ointé li les sissued unt.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the signs are such that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And after darkness, then it progresses to the consuming of limb by limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	And all the pain is done of the corne est semblablemente: a l'ovraige de pas oui escorps tous heurel. ous, and pense la pluste bien sois and bele, et les membres are not.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	When it is by the strike of any poisonous creatures, such as sea scorpions and serpents and similar beings.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the erosion is at the top of both thumbs, bandage it, and do not allow space for it to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	If it reaches up to the hand, bandage at the joint, so that erosion does not extend up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	If it comes to the arm, bandage around the joint; and if it passes the bandage, then it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	Et il ne mérite aucune atténuation en fonction de la quantité de son efficacité.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	Et ainsi agir quand la corroissance se présente ou une pierre : s'il apparaît dans la première articulation, alors cible après l'articulation suivante.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And when the articule ori, il est li coraigne; et les petites chirurgical jointe en la joigné à une ctre parler pour que tu ne croissance de l'articularisement les arthritique.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it rises up to the leg, grasp at the hip joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy than for the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of treatment with bandages or linen cloths is that you bind it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	so f;
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments with a wide spatula until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then cut or sew it, and place on each side a liner of linen, ensuring the suture does not touch healthy tissue;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And come to the patient other injuries and boils.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	so fat;
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or you apply certain binding powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the injured limb with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one man in his youth:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	the witht; d.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And this erosion first came to his elbow on the right foot, so much that it affected the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when a man sees the erosion, if he cleanses and covers the foot with copper, it becomes healthy.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And long time afterward the erosion came to his elbow again, and it moved towards me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	they should he li est droe le temps de lesstide: that nus.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And I urge you to cup his hand, so as not to have hope of restoring the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and also fear that if I were to cut off his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the virtues of the body were weak; and it was despairing, and returned to its homeland.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	so f; don this t
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have not mentioned these methods except for those which are used elsewhere if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	At no time does an abscess appear in the reattached area, and it remains so long that it forms a large mass of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And they become hard and burst open, and the pus fills up like blisters; and there is a feeling of heat in the eyes.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	Et le cuir qui est au-dessus est aussi fin comme un tissu délié,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And they shall not extend up to the bone nor nerve, and such diseases are called "healed."
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not termed as "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	However, if it is so stretched that it reaches almost to the bone at its origin, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And if it heals so much that you must cut away the entire scar tissue, especially when it is fine like a piece of cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and not because of its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	;
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	Et la peau est épaisse comme du chagrin, donc prenez soin de l'enema ainsi :
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look to see if the breasts are large, and the vein that is there has a foul-smelling odor.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then administer the Egyptian medicinal enema as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	tox.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	As long as the medication is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then take of it according to your need, and make it with water and honey.
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and in cleanse the chest, and strain the urine;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	li's: it is de
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Perform this many times, until the joint is shaped properly, and bone is at its place.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never once is it cleansed with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not available, then you may take ashes from the wood of a vine and pour water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	by m:
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine or ash water.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If you use an enema of water and honey containing some litharge.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or if you use an enema with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has properties to cleanse and purify.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	t s:
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	When you have done this, and you are assured that it has been properly relocated.
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the clyster brings forth heat within him,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you should provide a room for rest and recovery, and use rose oil mixed with wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	and mon;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	If the feces are protruding from the chest, and he cannot pass a suppository.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If it is slightly enlarged by a hot iron and you apply an Egyptian ointment poultice,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	When applying basilisk oil, let it spread widely;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, if you leave just enough so that they can enter: either where it was or where an enema may pass through.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if there is a boil filled with pus above it, then place the bandage either higher than or lower where it lies.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	et se c s de lde le t ou pruil; nd so e: f açs, and that; don’t by the *b.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	If you cannot cover the wound properly as you see it,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If the bowel is protruded, arrange it so that it sits at the lowest point possible,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	Because when the bowel is prolapsed, do not leave it unattended for long periods of time,
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the wound from above as you see fit,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If fitted thusly, let the bow string pull lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowstring.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to apply on the wound,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And they extend underneath a linen cloth that covers the entire chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then grip firmly the skin on that spot of the chest, one-third wider than the first.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	And then apply soothing balm under another linen according to the amount of the spot.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And place on the protuberance of the chest to relieve pain, without removing the large bandage for many days afterwards.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And those who are upon the protuberance of the chest often remove it in order to alleviate the pain,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and understand that which flows out from the bandage, whether it is poison or pus or sufficient, or digested or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	And when your medication has spread in such a way that you see changes beneath the skin near the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And so heure. ici les mains.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	Et puis redressez-le au matin ou au troisième jour, et quand vous réparerez la plaie.
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If there is a change in the bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if it becomes an unpleasant swelling of the breast after many days, understand that the breast is not ill.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	soigne:
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	When illness approaches. For there are men who treat their wounds with warmth, and others who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if it remains inflamed for many days within the breast where the milk does not flow, knowing that the breasts are unhealthy;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the breasts become dry later on and wither, then apply moisture-drying medicines in substance but dry in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And so they said: C. the and so que time Tamen la w. Do this t. If: M.tileme it'ud their n'zard:
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take essential oil of myrrh, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal amounts of old wine by substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then concoct and use it; and likewise makes more effective when cooked to thicken.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	In the making thuisi'qur. Ou cognique et cuit deteriaus si vous est confiture et leis de bonle couvrez avec douze lait and quoie aulat; et asseoir cuits lor teilet les miz à s’on que tu, se tissantee le paira.
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	When you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, then powder over honey while it is on the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	Then take a bandage, spread it out as a cloth, and place it over the breast, without applying any long-lasting ointment.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of holy basil, which are like flour from wheat and barley;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	the line
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	When the treatment is lengthened, and it is not healed by this remedy,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Therefore tell them that the suppuration is in its onset, and it exerts pressure on the bone or hard tissues, or joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If [there's] a treatment of an abscess, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	the line the ou they with h like:
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarics are boils that arise under the nail of the thumb.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or of the foot, or perhaps arises elsewhere.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	ine pluse too much les pie to the worms's and;
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they will turn and pour bowl-water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps turns the entire thing.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And it brings infections up to the bone, causing pain until it is full, and the head of the shoulder is two fingers wide, and the color is dusky.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat them as we have described in the section, but the treatment does not work,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary to cut away all excess flesh attached to the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is of great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	heal et al te:
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	If it is necessary to place the rod under the nail where there is a mark.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and insert the stick on top, and gently but subtly separate that marked area.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and place on the remaining affected area medicinal substances that are burning and corrosive to remove all of it.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with ointments until healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if there is decay in the bone, coat it and wrap tightly, for as long as the bone decays, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the joint decaying, cover it with a cloth as previously mentioned.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	(e:
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is forced outward, causing a bulge, and there is great pain, then you must first support it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut off the toenail of the great toe by trimming across underneath.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	de, and do not:ssont; c ils lesse te
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If this occurs, place something above to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of throbbing hands doubles
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	Those who are dislocated in the hands of certain men by chance are all fleshly.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	text there is not as much like that is to f. Then he may beign; and then they don’t the youre de t, s which est lis noit:
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them spring from the root of the joint, where the birth is among some of our bodies.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born with any deformity do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those at the joint of the two fingers, by chance it moves.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of those who are fat if they are somewhat lightweight in a certain manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Size them at the root with a wide spreading cut.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are particularly difficult to treat; hold them with your handkerchebreak.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those who are born or come afterward, it is necessary to bandage the area around until reaching the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bandage the bone with an appropriate swathe as such, then heal it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	by at; and the patient (Ceste.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to treat that swelling so that it heals according to its natural shapes.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two sheets or cloths moistened with oil of roses, so they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you put between two pieces of fine linen until the eyes are healed, as it is appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	et so and c, then toœuvre de l's, and s, ou:
Des vils	Of evil ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are large veins swollen with excessive melancholy blood that come to some members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often occurs in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry loads, than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary to then provide it with an occasional purge of colic, and then sanitize the navel of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is to wrap them and let out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you lift the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	n’s; That l’est en ligne le*e le t i want thera de a moi; they; by.flement.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then straighten the leg of the patient from above the hip to the area below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein at one place or in two or three places of a wide size.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then draw and strain the black blood into your hand from one end to the other as much as that amount which the patient'cuers can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then wrap it, and instruct to color with meats rendering it black.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And begin the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, causing discomfort to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The actions of this treatment are as follows: raise the affected limb, if there is much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	in at s (and they present c: that the re que c
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bandage, heat it with fire, and then wrap the vein for a long length at the head of the sinew, or in the area below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then proceed with cutting the skin at the incision, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears as you touch it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And when it is seen red and black, and when it enters or crosses the skin, it seems like a white string;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	If you see.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then wrap it with a piece of cloth at another location above three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Next lift the arrow shaft, as you have done before, and attach to another sheathing.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then cut a different size, or more if needed, then lift it, and encase the arrowhead in two pieces of wood.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	they should be f iusme las:
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	Et s'il te n'as pas de tressage et de levage, alors il met une aiguille à toute partie solidement attachée.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	Et il fixe et tire dessus, et place une broche au centre, puis tourne votre main à gauche et à droite jusqu'à ce que cesse le mouvement.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	Et il doit être soigneusement maintenu pour éviter de se coincer ou de se coincer ; sinon, il ne peut pas être tissé ni soulevé, ce qui nuit à la personne.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completely treated it, place a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound area; treat until it heals fully.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is twisted and coiled together, not straight as we have said, then you should... (Note: The translation seems incomplete here because the original Old French text appears to be cut off. We can't translate further without more context.)
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If it is necessary that you split it twistedly but do not cover it completely; and treat as we have previously said. (Note: The translation may be challenging due to the archaic medical terminology and practices described in Old French texts.)
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	with this.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	Et il est d'une grande bosse, car s'il était subtil, il couvrirait le ventre, mais il est large comme nous l'avons dit, et c'est sa forme :
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is situated in legs and warm parts where no grass or trees grow, and on land without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	;  lest.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	If as it enters within the body like a snake and winds about, embedding between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it brings a great inflammation to the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then it changes the spleen, and begins to bleed out as though a root of a plant is growing.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	the ou
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	Et leave the bolt during on the leg, and all times when it is not at its end, then wrap around the bolt and the wound.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, then cut off a part, and wrap the remainder, but do not cover it completely at its root until fully healed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cover it, it may enter into the flesh and cause an abscess or rot there, and a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	t shall mace: The c;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And it is sometimes this vein when treated with five or six long palms (lengths of bandages).
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And once upon me came a man who had it (the vein) cut from ten or so lengths of bandage, and when you bind it, he pours out some blood or pus, and penetrates all the way to the bottom.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and it flows out completely; and all the material within (the vein) is emptied, then be made whole again with putrefying medicine for several days, after which it's healed like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	:
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And it often comes from a fall, causing great shock; treat it then as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land 'ox sickness', for it often occurs with boils.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	the d;
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And it feels so very much from limb to limb, as if they are torn at the place where it goes, and breaks out in force.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is inflamed due to putrefaction of certain humours, as snakes and worms and ascarids or bellies come near.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its severity, because when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	Jum: �.chfro;
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being bled or milked, one cannot force it when it goes out.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	If it thus becomes necessary, then bind the joint firmly above and below with strong ligaments tightly.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then also wrap around and secure on either side of a fastening that is fully in place in the chair, and you do not fail to:
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If fire cauterization is done on top of it, until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it causes is that they run with oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the oil, firmly pull off its eyebrows, then bandage with a cloth.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	the same: so that c, and also to s, and there, ift;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if infected with meats gone rancid, putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of pain arising from windwasp
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called 'vacire' in our land, and it brings pain to certain limbs.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered swelling on her arm near the elbow.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And after a while, I saw them rise like worms in the shoulder;
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And it's quite sudden as soon as heal. Et me se l’espeirez.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then shortly after, it runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then he told me that it returned within the body as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	(1 dislocation:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Anyhow, I want to maintain that they moved pain from there to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I did not see it in the woman as such.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	thet.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear immediately due to this reason for those who are insane, and have wet bodies and veins returned.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see treating this disease, and the insane feel that pain, if it reveals to you as we have said.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	sofate empi;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	Et cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If the treatment of those that stand out from pus-filled bumps like foul pills and syrup pills, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Arrowheads or arrow fragments
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	it; the in de the c,
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, small ones, hairy, and loose.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have two edges, and those that have tongues, and those where there are fragments.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and those which fall off in any limb do so in one of two ways: or on the principal member they grow hairy,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	;
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it bleeds from any part of these limbs, and signs of death appear, which I will now tell you about.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, for death comes in various forms afterwards;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and if this bad sign does not appear, and the arrowhead is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	cguarde; ’s (do they t; And so pleu do not is not a such that: yout.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	When there is scotoma and blindness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflamm <|im_sep|>inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And sometimes it is without strength in the nose or ears; and occasionally affecting speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And jump of the wound white as hairs, and healing like red meat.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	If these signs appear to you, proceed with treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not deeply embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrowhead when it is lodged or has passed through indicates that it is near the left shoulder blade and feels as if it were embedded in a hard object, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And sometimes the arrowhead moves as hairs would; and there is black blood coming out, accompanied by coldness, chills, and sweating.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	how far. the te l'fcorheck: 2 said prsee al jette s but if not de est et its, then le's n’d (1; they t
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow wound that is never found without a stream of foam from the wound; and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and they gasp loudly and seek cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow penetrates into the flesh near the small ribs; and it produces a large wound with great pain and gasps, causing all limb movement at the shoulders to cease.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters through the belly; or perhaps it exits without leaving any of the indigestible flesh in the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	When the arrow comes to the belly and does not pass through the intestines immediately, there is no hope for its removal or treatment of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow penetrates into the bladder and the urine stops flowing, causing the patient to feel severe pain; suspect that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, as the arm and elbow and throat and shoulder and neck and spinal column and back muscles, and thighs and legs, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man whose arrow struck the top or root of his nose.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and injured him on one side beyond the fat of the ear, yet he remained somewhat sane without a doubt.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	s; t, and: theyrsted et s c, so far:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow is reset, reaching it with just the tip towards its base.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was the large arrow of a Turkish bow with all its feathers intact on one side, no ear-holes; the shaft was whole, and there were no peculiar incidents to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And an arrow pierced his throat of one with Christian beliefs, and the arrow was Arabic with ear-holes:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I approached the Barbarians cunningly until I betrayed them, but the Christians remained safe.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I betrayed an arrow into his belly, thinking he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after it had passed thirty days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	les se pee s hau:
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow wound to his head or back, and the injury is dressed above it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and lodged within, it remains undisturbed, not changing its natural position,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If this, they do not and some: s ;
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and his wound was quickly healed.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And it remains without causing much pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And pierced an arrow into one of the king's servants, that was lodged near his back,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	d s and le t.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I went to treat it after it had been present for three days, wherein I found the wound greatly narrowed.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I carefully touched it with all my skillfulness, and felt nothing.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And there was pain and discomfort near his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	by the p rascels. Dozb'9 dont it, then to make;t is t s unstable et so:
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I place on the spot a soothing poultice to promote digestion because it prevents swelling.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the wound from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	And I applied a soothing poultice immediately, and cleansed the injury thoroughly; thus the patient remained ill for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	with nail to se de t. En flue so it is nott that s;
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I place on the wound a corrosive medicinal vinegar until it is opened.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tried, and felt the head of the arrow which was loose in its place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then, on the approach to the wound with that particular medicinal herb, until the head of the arrow appeared clearly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	And it passed well through all its terms in about two and a half months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And then I dressed the wound with pincers on both sides which could not be removed;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	les so s and yout they b in sondement; the ou ils l'ta; pas; that helement line c p are not ce pe:
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to how its form comes at the end of this chapter, I will treat it and leave the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be repaired:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I will leave it open then; and afterward, the wound is stitched up, and the patient is completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	ete ome donde pate:
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you attend to this which I do not say, for books cannot fully comprehend.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters compare a little on important matters and that which is currently present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	five works, and five instruments are involved in dealing with strange things occurrebeing in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	t that they, so s; ct a e ce de the patient la: E tre Cordon'sisle, and make you can:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	When they come out at their place or from another direction.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And the one that has slipped into it enters through those openings and is lodged in body tissues, and does not slip out again anytime soon.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And so times byt leue los qu's.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And so too if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot be removed, let it remain as such for some days, moving slightly each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it may pop out, and if not, puncture around it with a fine hole as long as the surrounding flesh is stretched thin, and then pull through.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the head, and reaches almost to one of the brain's chambereness.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	Et certaines des occurrences que j'ai mentionnées précédemment : ne tire pas sur le tendon, mais laisse-le pousser jusqu'à ce qu'il retrouve une longueur égale après un ou plusieurs jours.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Car si l'flèche arrive jusqu'au foie, c'est la mort.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	E se l'flèche est enfoncée dans l'os uniquement, et ne parvient pas au foie,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And it causes the patient to stay for some days with a sense of imbalance; then apply the method using thread.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very thick and cannot come out this way, so I treat around the edges as I have said; then heal the lump until it is healthy again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is reset within the body so that it cannot be seen, seek out all its parts.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument to extract it.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot reach the wound or the depth of the arrow due to its location,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	the mains waste as you said s nowt, and se par leur bon:
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	Et trace the arrowhead if you see it, and if there are ears on the arrowhead where it holds.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If the bone that is half pierced by two parts can be moved as you see.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead as much as you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	1 ine de d.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, let it reach the joint's vicinity before pulling, for extraction would be agonizing.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood is opposite, follow what we have said in its chapter regarding treatment;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision on the nerve and vein, and devise as you can extract the arrow without danger,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	:
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	This is the greatest aid it can be, and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that enters from another place where there is no opening or swelling in the skin can be seen or felt distinctly.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Therefore, cut accordingly as long as the pliers can grip it, and then extract it; if the arrow is now loose.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	(s a griggd: 't. Do so and there that line the same f : "I sant;
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	If it cannot come out, let it remain for now, then resume extraction until it comes out completely.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if it were of the arrow shaft that is there, break off all its parts;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it were bleeding, and you are to administer bandaging, then with a suitable instrument proceed.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	the same.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	When an arrow is embedded, if it uses a pointed instrument entering in, to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, it must be cut around where the poison is, if you know where.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	When an arrow falls out or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to vital organs, and you must cover up on top of it if necessary.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful not to cover the veins or nerves, and then extract it, and then close the wound if needed.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and let the wound heal completely.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	feust by n's, that f.
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many ways to handle it: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The form of a split nail is like the feather of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push towards the tip of the arrowhead, as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	do they are. Jus le c; and i est la ou:
des voinnes dou cors communes	From the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Veins from which one is cleansed are thirty-one, including sixteen heads.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Of the ears that are thereafter "their names are:
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries which are visible in both temples;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins that are in the armpits of both arms, which are called "aspiracles";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein that is amidst the forehead; and the vein that is under the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two tendons which are at the shoulder blade;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins which are in front of the mouth above the lips, and these are the veins called "palatine";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins of which we commonly have five on each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it lies near the left ribcage, and they call it "the head's vein" (cephalic vein);
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "vena saphena", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilica veins;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	le t.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "the spleen of wind," located near the spine.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is that which one palpates, clearly felt below the ribcage.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the spleen is the vein found between the little finger and the ring finger, with two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	by it’s, also a sus lesse they aret and the ble if you should be in and then so ont is not d m et t.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second spider, which is near the right ankle bone; and the vein called "Nesse," located in the foot of the opposite leg.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg are three veins above those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The treatment of veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	They. And then the main trecor de so a mic; if: f their to
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub it with a rough cloth where the veins are; then tighten the patient's neck with a cord.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until both veins appear behind the ears, in two places depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	choose at your discretion, and wherever you feel hairs above your ear, if it seems necessary.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	they do:
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And bandage and skin and veins well, two fingers across to cross them, and let the blood flow until you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and tie it tightly, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and fire cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And swelling, accustomed paralysis, and watery tears from their eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of his bones is such as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient's neck is strangely affected, until both veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	as:
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then grip firmly above the vein at your wrist with your index finger, and place the lancet upwards.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And lift the vein upward, along with the cuff, as you have done in two other veins before, and make a cut according to your needed blood flow.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The drain of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the drain of the head for ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and for redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "saw", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	I. This l's and so that you t, with: theta. The cont et ponder m: Ca big line est contra tad but se ctre quisme :
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then apply a ligature to the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is unsteady and not once does the blood flow from a wide wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it must not be too tight with the bandage; and if the vein crosses, because the bone is close by, and at times the bandage breaks when it is too thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The bandage of the two veins that are in the temples soothes the eyes, and on the gums, and on the nose's redness, and on the orifice within the ear, and diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	The nature of their ailment is such that the patient twists his neck by turning any ligament. As before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the bone, and may their illness be crossed with a short slightly wide gap, for there is no healing charm.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the gaps are subtle and may be broken; then dose the blood, however much you need, and afterwards apply a poultice and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	how: p; they do so ume c; ìtat the t TA:
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	As with migraines when redness comes to the face, especially if it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the condition of health is such that the patient grips his neck with his hands, then strains his eyes toward your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a long thin stick, inserting it into the space between the two nostrebs.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	;s c unt de la:
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too far with it, and make a proper incision according to your need, then let it rest for a night, as it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the wound:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The dressing of the two bandages helps with the extension of the limb and in starting meals, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and erosions, and herpes, and itchiness:
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	so that the. Don'ond (three per cent Pccordse t, either s butnfro utn; The word; line man and con, it; thentiguir : f in sonte; If he estt et ques: Morgue bon les et de lign:
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let the master stand over the patient's head, and the patient sit on a stool.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then he cleanses the vein with a bit of oil generously, then traces blood quickly, or as much as necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then make another incision in the other vein, then ties off the vessel, and compresses the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The patient should not restrain themselves; leave them until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
De la sainie des leivres	From the healing of boils
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the healing of sores in the mouth, and gum disease, and lip splits and ulcers and wounds, and burns within.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the nature of this illness is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	by le bon ne they are t he u ça.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Therefore treat both sides, and if you do not recognize them, and you have doubt.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If the larger of each side is treated, make two incisions as well, one above and one below, for it is done the same way.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the sinew is that the patient seizes between your hands in front of the sunlight, and lifts his tongue, and looks down from each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then cleanse both [veins], and do not cut too deeply, as the arteries are there from below.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the limbs that one commonly cleans according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	When touched at any one spot, there is a worm-like swelling or an olive stone that is as cutting sharply as scissors, and it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and subtle according to the breadth and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the worm-like swelling is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	To open veins with clear blood filled abundantly, containing thick blood and turbidity.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is the form of an olive-shaped bubble:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle pointed, and is for collecting fine veins where there is subtle lemon-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	the l’s and so e le bon:
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The appropriate physician's aid must ensure a sound sleep, and that he be well-rested, and that he cleans the artery which is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, as instructed, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	It must not be grasped by the flame (flame being a term for sinew or tendon), but cut with care as previously mentioned.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the pillow does not open clearly, it is proper to remove it and replace another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or if you desire any part of it, or you sense within its place in the arm: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And cover with a linen cloth at the wound site as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	the same things as:tile:
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the place of injury with egg white, and then bandage the arm, and cover the wound with a cloth.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the swelling at the site, for it is an artery: avoid damaging it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see a protrusion upwards just like the urine of an infant, and the wound is red and delicate, understand that it is from the artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	there by: 98th if f. And the tt a; If you give an example by ;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the arm is tied up, let it be so, and do not move for the patient; stay still in fear until healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not stitched up, and it bleeds, and medicines are not prescribed, cut the artery if open, for the head of the wound contracts; thus, bind the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fumitory, and crush it, and take one half and apply until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	by theta and you'ard, with t ;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Et les étincellements ne sont pas des griefs dans plusieurs positions pour le peu du lieu de la plaie, et la possibilité due à la liaison du bras.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The sanitation of the vein causes so much help that it draws blood from above and below the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilar and the cerebral regions, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	by: 1.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it swells and the nerves become numb, and sometimes cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve has been opened many times, and if it does not open at all due to its subtlety, you must sharpen the instrument slightly; and extract the nerve as much as possible with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, it causes great pain.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The cerebral shining helps, drawing blood from the head and assisting the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is fitting to poke at the elixir of olive oil or myrtle sap because it is the most effective of all remedies, for there are no nerves nor arteries in them.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is best to seek a simpler position, and do not worry about anything during the first attempt, and then start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes the head swells in certain individuals; however, nothing should be done initially, but it's not troubling.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	the chop; And if f la: nd Jare that les que ne ben; Do so and so, for his time.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	To avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and it shall be the surgery performed in one of the three veins that are here: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should begin the surgery with prayers and fasting, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And if it must be treated within one day or two days after 2 or 3 hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment for ailments that is prescribed does not have a set time, but when needed it should be done within a day or two, in all hours and at any time.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	oun et the tire not to ou s’apres done ; ors; and dulst. In the first must be de la peouldes:
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not attempt to lift anything heavy, those who are old and have surpassed 16 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And if anyone wishes to lift anything at all, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there are many feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out excess fluids harmful to the principal limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Those who are too indulgent in meats, or drunkards, as long as they remain so, nor those with dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and who have used purifying treatments after experiennce with colic pain, vomiting, abdominal dilation, frequent intercourse or travel, staying up late, coition, and anything else that affects the whole body, whether by things of weapons or bodily injury.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly drain the fluids, if they are heavy with meats and drinks or by any means you have at your disposal.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then with a bath or poultice if anything does not impede it to facilitate the blood flow.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and cleanse the vein near the wound on the third day as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep clear that day from work, pain, dislocation, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	thet, if they prud sesfoux the dele et de a boler.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	First strain the ligament moderately, for if it is stretched too tight or too loose, it cannot be corrected without causing harm.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	Then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and feel warmth.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then moisten the shins with a small amount of old oil, and then place your finger from your left hand over that vein slightly below the area you wish to strengthen.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	t; That isso l’tat; lesse: sofferd, as; c.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	There are veins that flee as well as cords in the armlet, and there are those that are full of windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	for if when it is placed over the flame, drawn to fire, and cannot open the vein, then one becomes of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it works on the vein, so that the wound is too narrow, then it must be that the armlet-makers are knowledgeable in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	est b in the line tous text a certain f. That is they shouldntara et:s s.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	If the vein is swollen and the patient hopes it will heal, allow one or two days without tying the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps an abscess may come; neither enter nor bathe, then resume cleaning if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the shaft is small or you doubt subtly and do not bleed as much blood as you see, so faithfully:
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And perform the work quickly, so that the vein may become inflamed; for this often occurs when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not resume the bleeding, and apply a little oil there, for it eases the body's blood loss, and moistens this place with the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and so administer the oil mixture on each bleeding vein that you treat, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	:ssi fon leur et les seben; the l’t to bond 0 (bon't; they are.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	When if it comes to large abscesses, which occur many times, especially when the opening of the vein is small and not fully healed.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If hasty, place a damp sponge with warm water and salt on it, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary to do this after the blood drains from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenish color at the site for some days, do not disturb it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	tul Castle; they that.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And it often occurs with the appearance of an abscess and inflammation in the groin area: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the location soft to the pressure of your hand, that is the harmful appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid placing anything on it as we have mentioned, for sometimes there may be a severed artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply treatment according to each blood's quantity and its color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too warm, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And one who is pale and weak, requiring blood extraction, should have the incision made wider, creating larger gauzes.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be nourished with little but often, and it is better to nourish them by cutting across rather than pulling.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This manner of dislocation is free from blood flow issues and nerve compression, and it allows the joint to move both long and wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those who need the joint to function, you should give them millet bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are faint, bleed three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have cold complexion, give them millet bread in syrup or honeyed syrup with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, well-fragranced syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it is inflamed at the wound, after much blood loss, one must give him broth with vinegar and a sweet-smelling syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and employ the other remedies we have mentioned in the section on fainting for draining of blood vessels.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to vent the arms and drain them again, when they are greatly inflamed, it must be done little by little, according to the quantity of their virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if you want to suck blood from the arm after the first drainage, and it has a strong body, then remain healthy six hours after the first drainage, or after the final hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if you wish to bleed from another area, do so on the second day or later.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that has become heated, and it causes fever; if one must drain a large quantity, then dilate the vein as much as possible until it flows freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	after he s tould; but by theirs
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	This often occurs when the surgeon is careless;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is unnecessary when you see the arm dislocated, to make blood flow out again a second time, with the artery closed, so that you press firmly above.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	and if it is curved, extend the arm quickly, because this would be very bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	However, let it heal until the second time; or do not touch at the tip of inflammation, as long as the vessels have hardened and clotted.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And place on some fresh sinew, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has receded, leave it alone and do not press until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed again the blood a second time, whether from that same place or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is bled at its root because it is composed thusly.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the knife turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind it securely so that the vein appears well, then sew now across the grain, not wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the wound be wide open, and sew well near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it, then wash the hand in hot water, and allow the blood to drain into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is infected, do not reinsert the hand in hot water, because during winter it's done more often than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	;d sober s. 8t; the (th and; a bishopte cont be.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The blood of the salve on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand, and pour on hot water until the veins are seen.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if you see any blood vessels across it, and cover them entirely without causing harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	said:
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then place the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, so that it cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and fat to the veins quickly to bind them together, doing this with each thread.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for the disease in the left hand is as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	; don'fe an:
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As with diseases of the muscles, retention of fluids, and illness of veins, and old hernias in thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his illness is such that the patient brings forth pus in hot water, and rubs over the vein until it dries.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and he lies on the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from there it goes out much blood.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	so far;
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	When you sanctify the foot's bone, beware of the nerves beneath it and cleanse as with a spatula; let the fumes ascend.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the sinew cannot be removed, place the foot in water and ensure that the vein empties well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	If you need to repeat it for a second time above a little, because the bone is tender.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	sontrigu; Is- Oudiers.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The root of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint and its inflammation causes pain in the thigh when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its inflammation is such that the patient lies in bed and raises it above the ankle by four fingers with twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise it does not open up; and if opened, the inflammation extends in all ways that you can see, including across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And instruct to move so you can grasp it, for the place is loose, and it is greatly supported by handholders.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you cannot grasp it, use any part of the body that fits around or behind the two flat sides, and towards the small hole, while guarding your nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make a sufficient incision where you see blood, and then tie the ligament, and place it on a cotton bandage and compress; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	sir scouch;
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or glass, or ivory; and suction is performed in two ways: either by pricking the blood to draw it out, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction method that does not involve pricking has two ways: either at full heat, or without heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And suction performed by drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	From which one is all up with the head; and the other is amidst the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in the two ribs of the neck; and the veins below the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the veins above the shoulders; and the veins over the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	, which is not de lest:
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the blisters of both ankles; and bleeding does not occur from venous punctures, but rather minute drops scattered within the vein.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And therefore one should not be afraid of it, as with the evacuation of blood;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And heal only those diseases that come from the evacuation of blood until they are cure; do not be afraid, but it has no fear and such, so qu’il est maladies qui venin, like otherwise feux.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	When by necessity of illness or custom, we take a rest at the beginning and end of each month, and in between every hour.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need to rest, have a heavy headache;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if others experience bloating and redness on their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	nat#C. Do-rairet's the ru: bon:
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are some who think about it, and see with their own eyes blood, wounds, death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order to ventose after three hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saint of the muscle helps with strength in the head... which comes to the eyes, and it must not be before the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	so that is a; the s:t they on the d does as much. Insect f (courd. The same taillez not to ch�farrith by https are the bewit continue and f:ler, but also est thems (or ceide et m les mort;llt se est s :
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it is not proper for those of cold constitution or with catarrh to do so, as it causes them much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason, it is not adviseby those with insomnia or cold head diseases to use them.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And often become disoriented and for this reason put the balm more to fear of illness; henceforth is applied with ointment.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Ventilation within the neck is located near the windpipe and base of the skull, hence it affects the stretching of the throat.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to an incision in the channel of the larynx, and all, and swelling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and should be gently treated, for if it holds too tightly, may cause obstruction or a bloated abdomen and body.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Ventilation of two ribs close to the neck causes pain in the head, otitis and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the root of teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the region of the sanctuary of the Basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand for placement, so he does not cut an artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation near the chin causes diseases of the mouth, and decay of gums, and similar illnesses within the mouth; it is in the region of the sanctuaturi de l’orifice du ventre, et as dolors dou flanc qui est par le nerfs des costez.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The whitening of shoulders signifies an illness arising from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The whitening of wrists is as much like three veins in the arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	too pude:
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is close to bone and contains veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The bladder that is above the rump is for hemorrhoids and diseases beneath it, and it must be large, made of wool, requiring thorough milking; and sometimes if it were too fine, it would break, causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The bladders for the legs cleanse openly because they draw blood from all over the body and are effective against ancient pains of the knees, hips, and bladder, and alleviate symptoms; they also weaken the body after prolonged use in certain positions, bringing about swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping is that you first place it empty and do so promptly, apply quickly, move equally, and continue without stopping until you see the spot turn red and swell, with a reddish color from blood: then release, remove the cups, and be aware of the condition of the body, for there are those who have tender flesh and clear pores; thus it is necessary to strike once only, making wide and somewhat deep incisions, and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood vessel is large, it should be struck twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vessel is very dense, it should be struck a third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we only strike once at most.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish to obtain much blood, let us begin often; and if the vein is weak, cut it deeply, and terminate so that the vessel be pierced firmly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And for those with large and hard skin, and who have inflammations, one should warm the bubbles of oil remedial and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this case, with blue oil or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	s;m; the her. Don're t
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If there is excessive swelling that is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balmmyrtle oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if it is the one you treat with tender skin and wide pores, there is no need to apply oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	by *t and there; The same* archu (pris the telle;
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses rise from old wine or water of beech, or infusion of anise or chamomile, or other similar substances.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And they must not exercise after the hot bath or in the bathtub, but an hour and a half after the bath; and do not sleep immediately after the cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	It is necessary that he takes a bath when he needs to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	the bie. 1if. M. Do this de t;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it is necessary to apply cold things such as ripe pomegranates and endive and lettuce easily, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and spices like cumin, and the fat of the chestnut, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold constitution should take a syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, with little seasoning, including spices like cumin, fennel seeds, small birds, and partridges.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	the me said it'ise alta; conterfair C.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is customary to give certain individuals triacle or muskat in front of the dislocation, or afterward, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it should be subtly administered without heating; however, only those who are hot may drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cupping vessels that are placed without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and kidney, and gout, and abdomen, and scrotum and groin, because these members cannot be pricked there.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	bytight las les main se tgrhe; that la: Sce they should n’sould and the ou f:
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	As we have found with the limbs when they are diseased; to remove the hardness that is in the member, as we apply pumps on the belly and the buttocks to reduce the swelling.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stones, and draw out the obstruction by its attracting power, if possible, or return the stone to its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And thus do it when you put it on the liver and spleen where there is retained gasness,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these blisters are made hollow for draining as needed; and sometimes they are filled with heat, and at other times plain water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	As with other pains in the loins, and thus you fill the blister with hot water poured over it or water that has boiled healing herbs in it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of administering fire to the blister is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	with dur:
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	et it may be from a fall forward such that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And let there be a rod of iron or bronze, to put on an appliqué chain;
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they should be large and small according to the diseases and conditions of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's blisters are different from those of old men, and thinner than fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And thus this blister should be placed upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take a candle of wax or ointment, and place it inside the blister across the shaft which is within the blister,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	for their they should de:
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it under the limb, and your thumbs should be under the joint that we have mentioned, so when you want to, as air goes in and out, inflate a bladder.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And apply ointment as before, and repeat often, if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the bladder used for treating pleurisy, it has no shaft nor prickle and is only applied when filled with water, and placed on the limb momentarily.
et c’est li forme:	by en il Flet suest; but that la jum; 1uer esttre ces their n'emlement mar :l its e tel le ou not so or.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without bandages being applied except to limbs where one cannot apply blisters due to their size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in the removal of scabs from burns, like boils or pustules, and other similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of their use is that when you find bandages that are in soft clean sheets without stains, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	by tocherne (uccut.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	Then make them of veins and compresses, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply bandages.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are smooth and dry, if there's a place to apply compresses or not, then do so, as it is very effective afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the wound slightly and apply plenty of water, squeeze well afterward.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	the mostn: 1
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	When there is a multiple increase of pus, apply crushed vitriol or scales and similar things until it dries up.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or place the lukewarm ointment on a layer of scraped skin, and leave it until they dry out completely.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take additional dressings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	; the chis.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then place it back on, and almost immediately as they feel the blood, they become rigid.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them bleed, apply a bit of aloe and ground silex or ash, which will stop the bleeding now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they involve the repair and replenishment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Understand, dear student, that the wise physician knows this chapter, which is not seen in any ancient books or letters read.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and therefore this knowledge is rare in our land because I have never found a good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	the t are allus, and sofckse J-h80. M. igne: that he c. I's.gement. The
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the treatments that are made, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say that in this book are the summits of speech and chapters wherein the wise place their understanding, staying on truth so those experienced may know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twist or distortion comes to anyone, it is proper for you to stabilize the patient's limb on both sides, if nothing holds them entirely, as in weak joints, or infants, or elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the tension is not very strong or too cold; and mix with cool water, that is to say cold soups, chicken, and veal broth, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself up too much with foods that saturate the veins with blood, until you are free of fear of an abscess or discharge of matter in the limb; then return to the first course of regimen as you have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy nutrition, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, beans, lentils, cheese, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with this kind of nutrebrightness the fractures heal quickly and faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the aged and infirm cannot be well mended or joined according to their natural state for limb strengthening, nor those who are too tender, like bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But pay no attention to it and reset the broken bone with large tendons that are strong and join the member together, until they strengthen as before; do not perform all of your work on it, and for this reason, nourish them with hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When a fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For some fractures go up to the head and others by sharpening, as writing with a pen tip.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a crack like a small tear.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each must have its own means and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings forth in that place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known the bone break by how the eye is twisted, and opened well on its side, and it is close to the press of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	if you have: counce.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	However, it can have twisting, or tearing, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But do not move the hand unless it is necessary; then apply medicines that come later in this manner and gently restrain now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breaks which are hanging loose, and are the two parts disconnected, they must now be brought together evenly, as when abscesses occur.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	c. The d cut
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then make it even with movements that you can perform easily and gently, knowing that the restoration is easier than those where there are broken pieces; then strain as necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken into two pieces, whether it's hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small limbs, or to two tendons, or to one tendon and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And set the limb according to its natural shape, so that if the parts of the broken limb are disjointed, you align them by all means at their original positions with movements that you can perform easily and gently, and ensure through your work there is no injury or pain for the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And properly align both heads of bone according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if the hand feels quite well to you but not perfectly: dress it neatly and do not strain or press it as those who cause abscesses with heat and contraction of limbs, which we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is about to break, gently restrain the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is so securely fastened that it feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain whatsoever, and then it must be placed in a position where it experiences no pain at all.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And ensure that it is set straightly, so that deformities do not arise once restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	the they had the lesse ne so be a m. Do you should no la f, and e:
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are of various sizes, both small and large, and forms.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs such as arms and legs: one must wrap them with soft fine linen.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those that are large, such as thigh and leg: one must wrap them with a wide strong bandage, for broad bands encompass the whole large limb, and grip it evenly on all sides so there is no slack.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	First, use gentle tapes, three or four turns depending on the limb, and hold your hand tightly along the entire length, then go above the fracture and grip less so that it's not too tight over the break, gradually move away from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the limb a little at a time until you grasp a large part of the healthy portion, then take another tape, and wrap around again near the fractured area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break and grip it moderately, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the stretched linen or cloth strips so that they are all equal, then tie it above a bandage, and then set proper dressings on top, unless there is an abscess or inflammeblock.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then apply something soothing to the abscess heat and remove the swelling, leaving it thus for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then tighten the dressings and be of a moderate width strip of strong cloth or wood shavings, or palm leaves, according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary for the lever to be placed on the fracture somewhat larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and so be as long as needed depending on whether the limb requires minor or major correction;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then strain the lever in the same way you did for the first time, and further with a cord if necessary, just as was done initially on the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	ane is:
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	If the threads are thick, as I have seen in works of foolish people who make their loops with linen thread, it is a great error, for the loop cannot be even if it is too fine, and it must not be more than less than two spaces between each stone.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the stones after resetting into healthy positions, place cotton or linen rags under them so they do not move.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, I will explain its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to strain all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when limbs are large, it is not necessary to apply splints unless after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the risk of infection setting in.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the manner of ancient splints to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stands on mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and use this concoction, not too clear or too thick, which is a common way of using the restorative splint for various conditions in adults as well as women and small children, since it is neither too warm nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of poultice for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take pitch from the pine tree and tanydeum and olive oil and gum arabic and mastic resin, about 12 parts each; myrrh and aloeswood, about 5 parts each; frankincense .viiij. (7) parts; and make a powder, with honeycomb wax mixed with raw butter; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this poultice as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, beneficial to many individuals.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another poultice beneficial for twisting: take mastic resin and white wax, about 12 parts each; myrrh and aloeswood, about 7 parts each; acacia gum .viiij. (7) parts; frankincense .x. (10) parts, grind finely, mix with water or raw butter, and apply to the affected area.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another poultice for joints and bones dislocated from their usual position, relieving pain upon application, and helps with the healing of fractures: take new wool, lint in oil, and put it on the affected area. This type of poultice does not restore but is good to alleviate inflammation caused by abscesses and properly soothes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to mend broken bones: take dry leaves of fig, and leaves of earthly poppy, and grind them together, and make a paste.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for mending broken bones and easing the remaining abscess. Take roots of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, bran, from each part; grind it, then mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply the mixture mixed with wet coriander or water, as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method for mending broken bones, especially when the abscess is persistent in healing the limb. Take roots of valerian, flaxseed, balm, sesame, and celery leaves, and flowers of violets and chamomile; from each part grind it, then mix with salt water or fresh water, or wine, depending on the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that nothing should be applied on a broken limb for healing other than wax and oil mixture, and it should not be too hard or too soft.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And according to Galen, one should apply dry and slightly warm substances on a broken limb for healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method for dressing wounds and alleviating pain: take crushed dog and cat hairs or feathers from birds, as well as yarrow and equal amounts of the same herbs, then grind them together to create a poultice and apply it to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then gently realign it shortly afterward, and be cautious to ensure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has his bone moved from its place; if he cannot remain in position, do not attempt re-dislocation.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	If pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling occurs, hurry and re-dislocate, and make the limb immobile now; take a light cloth, dampen with seawater, and immerse in cold water, then raise the area until the itching ceases, and pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap it in dry linen, moistened with rose oil or warm water, and bind it up, until you are sure of any heat coming from an abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the inflammamoin is on the limb and bone pain persists, then resume the subtle adjustment, with a little opium, and do not stretch it as strongly as before; delicately until it becomes steady.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need opium and ligature, when it is resumed as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not loosen it until after three or four or five or six days; and never leave it untied for twenty days, according to what is seen, as long as the fracture heals, and approach the joint above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then you must first reset it more firmly than before, and let the flesh grow, as I have said earlier; and if you see that the joint dries out more than necessary, know that no movement can occur.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	It arises from warm water baths taken each time you dislocate it, and do this every day, and rub the area lightly.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Thus through this practice you will induce numbness in the limb, and quickly follow what the wise doctors advise: they restore the member correctly; it is wrong to twist it back without proper care, and these are dreadful practices that lead only to more pain and working directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of breaking, various shapes, and causes are different;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because there are breaks made from the percussion of swords, and joints where the bone is cut all the way to the socket above the bone, as with an axe or stick; and for this reason, this type of breakage is called "hachure."
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cleaves the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impacted break, crack, or stone bruise, or from falling on stones, and similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a sliding fracture, which reaches the skin just above or below the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has been sutured in the bone as subtly as hair follicles, and it is a small tear, thus this breakage is called "hairline".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by being pierced with an arrow, or falling, or similar things, causing the bone piece to protrude, and its edges are as close together like pots on a stove; then within it there lies between the pieces of the arrow.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs mostly in those who have soft bones, just as children's heads do.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this occurs in all ways of bone fractures where small pieces are displaced as such; and I will speak about it here.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of bone fractures through displacement above them, and examination with probing rods, and by the decayed cartilage that is below.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known when you have discovered the bone and rubbed it gently; then the bone fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	by; and so.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an easily recoverable accident, but expect a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the pain first reaches you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone before the fourteenth day that you can move.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is thus (the situation), and you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, then so that the tissue around the bone becomes corrupted, come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	If the bone fracture reaches to the cloth covering the brain, then you must split the fractured part as such: and it is that you grasp the head where the patient has been wounded, and expose above the bone in all ways possible, and on the surface of the wound area more gently than possible.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if bleeding occurs at the exposed bone or abscesses appear, use what is necessary and it is that you fill up the area with milled cloths in oil rose.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And allow the wound to rest until the abscesses are soothed and bleeding stops; then start working around the bone to remove it. This is done in two ways of surgery: one way is that you cut at the narrow front portion, and this is its shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is to have numerous incisions of different kinds, some narrow and others wide, pointed or made with an iron instrument; perform this work gently, without cutting the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, it must be pierced all around so that you make incisions with chisels without piercing through the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the tip of each one to prevent the point from going beyond the bone; therefore, you should have several, so that each is placed according to the thickness of the bone, having chisels for all types of skulls; this is the form of the three methods of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	You place a vessel over the broken bone so you can feel when it is completely pierced; then move the vessel to another part for a while and do this throughout, then use scissors on the space between the fragments of bone as subtly as possible and gently, as we have said, until you reach the bone with your hand or any of the tools you have like pincers. And be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and reached it, then it is necessary to use an instrument similar to a scissor for cutting that remains attached to the bone, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other scissors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if there is nothing left of the small bones or scales, then lightly with one of your tools; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is more subtle; and let it be done strongly, as he says.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary to expose the part of the bone where the break occurred, and once it has been exposed, place atop the flat head of this chisel-like instrument, which looks like so:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And make the incisionez. Et les oilleu mors un le chrestant les oste oteinne:
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is dislocated to the bone, gently set it, as improper setting can cause harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin and the bone is cut above slightly, leaving small fragments; then apply care to that area, and use a fine razor to remove scales in varying amounts as needed for each location with the most suitable treatment according to the nature of the fracture and its shape.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are many large scales, first use more substantial tools, then transition to finer ones, and continue until it is thoroughly done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of these other hair treatments and delicate breaks, it is necessary to reset them according to their precise direction; and this is something that cannot be restored for those who have studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is discovered, it is necessary to take a piece of linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten with oil roseate, and place upon the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another piece of cloth doubled two or three times, and moisten with wine and oil roseate, and place upon the first cloth; and do this gently as you can, so that you do not burden the wound, but rather ease it by placing another layer on top, without tightening it more than needed to cover the wound only.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	Allow it to remain thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed down, then release it and administer medicines as root of lis, barley flour, wheat flour, incense powder, aristology, and similar things. And from these substances make powder, apply to the wound, and administer again medicine without causing pain.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure the wound is thoroughly cleaned, do not leave any ointment or bandage residue, as when sores gather above the brain cloth, they become hardened and swollen, causing great harm; for when a stinging substance is applied on top, it irritates below.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if by any chance something happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if darkness does not come with the medicine applied, so that it has its virtue, one must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil mixed with egg yolk, and apply it to the sackcloth.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then proceed in treating as is fitting until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that at no time are the two bones above broken or severed by themselves alone, for they are both bone; and that below is cartilage, which does not break nor twist, but heals in due course.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you set your little finger or thumb near the nose, and make the fracture even within your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the nail returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain during your procedure.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the nail, and cannot bring the finger back to its original position, it's necessary that you align them even with a bit of force on one side.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, you do likewise to reset it, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or last day when the abscess has calmed down, then bind to the neck with linen cloths, if the fracture is in one piece.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the linen cloths be so large that they fill the slits of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	by ous are the ou the cnzecors— (no in the whole. In this.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	At no time are goose feathers blown into the tent openings, and if one is near an exposed sore, it becomes aggravated, causing a breeze that troubles the sickly person; thus do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the wound while you work on it, place a piece of lint or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a small amount of diaquilon (iodine).
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not appear, apply a plaster using flour of sage, powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place it over light gauze strips without binding them to the wound.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	If the broken bone of the nose is small and crushed into tiny pieces, extract it with appropriate splints, then straighten the fracture, and treat various difficult conditions such as inflammatury and swelling, as necessary with suitable plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no dense nose without wounds, apply bandages and compresses until it heals completely.
de la routure de la mandibule	Regarding the treatment of a broken jawbone:
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound or fracture present, and the breaks are slight only, unless cracks inside can be seen with ease.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger of your right hand in it gently, align it carefully with the other hand slowly, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated at two points, it is necessary that you adjust the expansion so evenly.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movements of the teeth occur or jostling happens, then strain one with a thread of gold or silver or silk; place on the broken mandible cerot, and put on it a double cloth; lay a large well-made stone under the cloth, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, at the junction you can see, and instruct the patient to rest, and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure is changing, relocate the dislocated joint, and then restore what has changed; place a poultice over it with finely ground powder or wheat flour after removing the cerot; put on a light linen, and as long as the poultard remains, the patient's condition does not change; often it is cured in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come about, treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, no part of the bone has been set; subtly remove the fragments near the bruises with this tool.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flame as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces of bone and it does not stay in place, close the wound if it is wide, and apply on it some bandages to stop bleeding, until it heals properly.
de la forcele	by; æm�:our :
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks in many instances on the shoulder blade, and there are three ways to break it: where it is broken and torn into two, with fragments, and it is easier to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is as follows when there is a fracture with an open wound, so you have two assistants; one who warms the shoulder that has been broken off, and the other extends the neck to the affected area; then place the fractured bone on your shoulders so that it forms correctly, without any appearance or discomfort.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round rod made of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary; then stretch out the broken bone and lift it up, so that you can properly align the fracture with your hand.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the dislocated shoulder back into place because it comes out from the front, then let the patient lie on their stomach and place half an ounce of weight against the shoulder blade, and apply pressure to push the shoulder downward until the bone is realigned.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then go to the broken bone and if you find fragments, make an incision; gently extract the pieces of bone, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, apply a splint from one of the instruments you have; but place it under the shoulder blade for support:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And make it into a spoon shape and not pointed, and be of the same width as needed according to the size of the bone and strength of the hand; and have two handles, if you see them, with one being wide and the other narrow, just like the pattern of the wound that was made when you treated the bones:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of an abscess being hot, if the wound is small, or if you doubt whether the pus is hot, lay a cloth and bandages on the wound according to its amount.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes out, apply oil-soaked cloth and lambswool and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The setting of a bone when it is without wounds and not torn, is to put plaster made of finely ground powder and egg yolk on the bone, along with light bandages, and if needed, place a shaft underneath the cast.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of palm width, then place two folded cloths over the dislocation, and the splint; then take a subtle rod three fingers wide and long, wrap it around that band, ensuring the head of the band is hanging.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the rod over the dislocation, turn the band around the neck and above both joints, good and bad; adjust each part's movement, and when you see that the fracture is held steadily, and clearly the rod does not move beyond the broken bone, rewrap it daily, and keep restraining once the ties loosen.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And lay the injured on his back, and place a small pillow underneath their shoulder to elevate it; this will help with pain from the dislocation by supporting the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, ensuring no bad accidents occur until 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then begin the splint again if it is needed, and restrain and leave it so until it is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the broken shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Occasionally the shoulder may break or dislocate and cannot be moved with force; if you are to set it according to the shape of the fracture, and mold it in all natural ways that you can; then put powdered meal on the wound with plenty of egg white, and light gauze; then place a wide and delicate bandage over the shoulder, slightly wider than the injured area, ensuring evenness along the entire shoulder using linen thread for sutures; and then restrain it completely with a large strong binding so that the bandage does not move from its place, and check each day if there is swelling; every time you adjust, ensure the bandage remains in position and elevate the patient's chest. The shoulder will be restored within 20 to 25 days, but it must not be released too soon because bones do not set easily again once moved.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	When a fragment of bone juts out and is not covered by skin, push it downward, and the bone, as we have said in treating an abscessed lump with heat.
de la brisure dou pis	In the case of broken thighs
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The thigh is never broken all at once, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks further back. And when it is broken in the middle, it descends below, and the patient feels great pain, weakness, and numbness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens up cracks in the broken bone, which they feel very well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of restoration is that the patient lie on their back, and place a pillow between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades, and bring together the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust them in all ways possible until they are as they should be; then place emollients and plasters over the fractured bone, or any other light material, and wrap it in a bandage so that it does not move; then return the ligament to its round shape on the back, and do so gently, checking every hour for movement, and if it becomes more relaxed, keep it strained; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or pustule, do so promptly, and loosen it, remove the plaster, and provide whatever treatments are necessary for healing; then reapply the plaster, and keep it strained until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	The breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	This is the questioning and it's done inquire well by this: "and so beau li les ares dite paroles.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resettings are to make the fracture even as it should be. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is descending into the chest, causing the patient great pain and pointlessness, like from pleurisy, because the bone lacks flesh; it swells with points, and vomits a large amount of blood, making it a serious illness, and the ancients have given much attention to this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that inflame the stomach in order to push the fracture forward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause abscesses to become infected if they were not already present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, let the healing process begin.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that they apply bandages on the body to soak with tincture, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the bandage may draw excess fluids to the area due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	Cover the bleeding wound with hot oil and apply bandages between the ribs to ensure even pressure around it; then treat with plasma cures, fatty substances, and medicines.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured by the protruding bone, and there is doubt in the patient, then you must split open the fractured rib area; and it is necessary to use an instrument to guard over the wound; then you must cut the bone, gently extract a little, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with plasters until healed. And if pus comes out, apply moistened linen cloth soaked in rose oil on it, and place it over the area; and while treating the fractured rib that requires treatment for abscesses, ensure bandaging is done correctly along the ribcage where necessary, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	Treatment of a broken collarbone involves applying moistened linen cloth soaked in rose oil to the area and ensuring proper bandaging over the affected ribs for healing.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	At no time does there come a fracture of the hip bone, and rarely happens that it bends; and similarly to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will survive or not, be aware that if you see their hands becoming softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you poke the fingertips with a needle, they do not feel. Know that it is fatal in certain conditions, but if they are moved and feel well when restrained and not allowed to, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if proper care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will survive or not, be aware that if their feet are softened, and there is an accident where they have clots (hematomas), and under the back one feels windiness and egestion without volition; and when it has been soothed on its belly, it also experiences egestion without volition. And when it is soothed on its back and wants to rise, it cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not attempt any treatment in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply ointment of rose oil or oil from a young goat on any abscess until it's eased; then place it under one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and they should not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover the affected area with a cloth; then remove the bone and join both edges of the wound, stitch it closed if they are large, apply anointing ointment from charcoal until healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, known as "head of the cow", put your pouch on your left hand, and place it at the same level as your right hand, then place a plaster and bandage over it if needed; then press, and if there are any dislocated bones, fix them, remove them, and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally a hip bone may be broken, and if so, it is not greatly reduced in size; they become long, incline towards the pelvis, causing pain at the location, swelling, and breaking further.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you are above the fracture; and determine which bone is broken and its shape; and if the fracture is solely at the head, then set the same fracture to have natural alignment.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the break is long or it descends into the innermost part, have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that break is ready.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And once you have aligned it, place it on the embalming table, then put a wooden or metal rod underneath and secure the break, so that it does not move; and remove any debris from above the ribs until they are level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his sound stomach, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes to pass, do not touch it until the abscess is soothed, and follow what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and bind as needed, unless there is any unfortunate incident; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder joint fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	by 1 the p
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie off two arteries and veins, and cut them short, then suture the wound over one of these; then pour some boiled oil or egg whites onto the sticking plaster, until it reaches the edge, and have a wooden trough underneath, then hang it from any heavy object or extenders reach out towards it; then place your hands around the tear equally, until the tear heals as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you suture the wound over its hollow part, and tie off the hand at its neck, then command two assistants so one dyes what is above the tear to his hands, and the other dyes below any vein, and they extend each to their respective parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too large, then tie off one vein above the tear and below it, and extend each assistant to their part. And if the tear is close to the head of the shoulder, it's appropriate to place one ligature under the joint, and another towards the neck, on either side of the tear; and similarly if the tear is towards the neck, then place a light ligature without too much force so that the tear becomes level with its location, and with the neck; then balance the cut equally as it should be, and tie off, unless there are abscesses.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess occurs, do not attempt to extract it until at least 3 days have passed; in the meanteby placing a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar on it until the abscess is calmed; then extract it, ensuring that you place the splint over the break, assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand under the armpit or breast; cover with a bandage, and hold steady against the shoulder, then the arm so that it remains in position for setting unless something prevents it or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you suspect that the bone is not aligned, use splints and place a wider and stronger one over the fracture than the others, with two inches of space between each splint; make sure each splint is large enough to extend beyond the fracture by three inches on either side; then hold steady against the splints as I have described at the beginning of this chapter regarding holding firmly and not too loosely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you notice the fracture site and swelling from compression, as we have said; then wait until seven days to check it daily for three times a day so that no inflammation or infection occurs at the site where it is too narrow; if necessary as we have stated. If there are other complications.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	If no such incidents occur, do not dislocate it until after three or more days, and let the patient sleep on their back with hands placed over their stomach; place an equal plain cloth of wool under the shoulder, and check each hour during the day or night that the broken limb does not move or soften its ligaments. Then proceed by the virtue of medicine, and give them flesh as we have previously mentioned, in a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when it begins to regenerate, it should be thicker. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to heal completely within forty days; then you must dislocate and administer baths and ointment medicines to straighten the area. If the stricture is ugly and bent, delay dislocation for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	On the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fibula," one being small and the other large, and it's that lies below; and sometimes the large fibula or both at once; occasionally, the large and small breaks occur together, or when either only the small.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small vessels are broken, restoration is easy, as is healing; and when the large ones are broken, so is the treatment difficult, and more painful than if they were broken all together. If only the small vessels are broken, then it should be extended slightly but evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large vessels, then stronger stretching is needed; extend over a small cushion, and raise the sleeve of the hand higher than the others, while the smaller fingers should be lower than the others, and cross your hands on either side of them, with another cushion in front of you raised higher so that you do not strain at all. Then extend the ministers' arms to the part below his hand or a joint, with one pair above the other. And then place it evenly, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break is in pieces, put each piece back in its place, and if any are out of order that reach towards the bone, and you cannot restore them to their place, then move it upwardly until your doctor can see it.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the wound caused by breaking skin, I have discussed it with each individual practitioner; then they should take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of healing an abscess occurs, then apply a cloth of crepe made from oil-rosin and white wax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; place such a cloth gently over all abscesses until they are eased. Then remove the poultice, and insert the splint with plenty of powdered molybdite, after which position the stitches so that at the fracture site they protrude slightly further outwards than the others; ensure there should be seven or more different stitch positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and apply pressure above the fracture stronger than elsewhere, as previously mentioned at the start of this chapter; also let the bandages that cover the area be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and use thread made from flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And after some days, check the limb and ligaments again.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if anything accidental happens to the limb, such as itching that comes upon the member; then you must wash the affected area with warm water until the itch subsides; and let the limb not be left in strict rest. Then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones have settled, continue as before.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	: s: nus les maints couvre and the chauz estt curoit a se vint la bles le mule the covent aui de lesmesse en dou ; et ne quire ce li prise et jos tu que si pas, est li, et, then les. And as tout lien l’e ite:
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not reset it until xx days or so, then tie his hands behind his neck and make them even, and watch for movement and displacement, and let him sleep on his back; know that this dislocation is restored in xxx days or vj days, and sometimes in xx days, according to the compositions and complexions of the substances.
de la brisure de la main	For a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and sometimes we see fractures, but they often occur more than once.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	When the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it must be instructed to bind with a cross-stitch and sit straight up evenly; then place his hand under an extended cloth, extend the broken bones equally in length, and apply plaster and cotton wool if there are no abscesses, then put on a splint according to the quantity of the fracture; and be wrapped in a linen sheet.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is near the windpipe within the hand's plantar area, make a splint from cloth and instruct the patient to bind it with their broken palm; then strain using a long piece of fabric, ensuring the splint at its base is as large as the hand'amoeba
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the heel, it must be that you place a splint underneath and another above in the plantar area, ensuring the hand remains open and straight; then wrap around the entire hand, securing the joint between the bones.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if a fracture occurs in one of our legs, if it is the knee, then set it evenly as needed; and use a splint, ensuring it does not move; and if the fracture is with other joints, adjust them like those indicated or among others, aligning them evenly, using the healthy adjacent joint that follows; bind all together in one place so they may move accordingly, placing a small straight stake, as for supporting a hernia. Be cautious during healing and placement of abscesses, and care for those who come with it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	For a broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; its restoration consists in tying one ligament above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister's hand equally to their side; and this is when the fracture occurs within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, let one hand be towards the wrist and the other above the fracture. Likewise, if it's near the knee, then place the hands by the knee and extend outwards; then align the bone equally with both hands, according to its natural shape, and then apply the splint, unless an abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it's hot, let the abscess be soothed first and then return to your work and care; the splint is made in part this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the break with a doubled cloth bandage of two or three layers and hold in place any excess. Then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint; then adjust the head of the thread upwards; then again wrap above the leg and hip with the cloth bandage, then place a stake over the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the hip with soft fabric to make the tightening even; then begin to tie three or four turns or four on the break; and as you move closer to the break, apply less pressure. Then go back up to the two knees of the thread that you tied between the leg and the hip, and place three stakes above them, then return to below the heel with the head of the thread until you reach the foot; and if it does not move from its place, leave it as is; then check for any abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it occurs, when the dislocation happens, and address what comes out as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, one should attempt to remove them; but if not possible, then cut open the wound, and extract deeply; and treat according to our instructions until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	and the f if is le telle ; quia s’en our les d't comme a c’est lits it be onme et este lier to the boils. So let them iudged, then, si tu la comtre. Et heus; Et les traite, done ne pains:
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the groin is restored in one day or less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the fold by the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the fold of the knee joint there are often sprains, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is only a tear or wound, and leads to all kinds of wounds, and feels like much pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	t the line f (et n’s: 1.
de la brisure de la jambe	of a fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	He says that in the leg there are two bones: one is called "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile"; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, so the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the methods are alike.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	by thet.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen; then reset it. Then straighten the fracture, align it evenly, and secure with splints equally; but always ensure that the breakage looks good, and if there are several pieces, make the realignment lesser and lighter; proceed as your skill allows.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two bandages made of wooden staves that wrap around the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from knee to ankle; then cover with two wraps above and below, securely tying them together so that the leg does not lean either left or right, enscribed well; and no one should administer a stick along the length of the leg if it is made of wood, instead they place the leg in position to restrict movement, properly doing this on the fracture site where there is an open wound; daily move the leg to check for any bleeding or other accidents; cure accordingly until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	For the bone break in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but at the lower leg bone there is occasional breakage and of small shafts, and nothing occurs that causes strain or other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the lower leg bone, and you see these bones protruding from one another, place such poorly aligned foot on the ground as if it were to walk, then now put your own foot under theirs where the bones are raised, press until they return to their original places; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, and with two fingers plain nail clippers, clip near the belly of the lower leg, then straighten the bone as quickly as possible, then wrap in linens around, and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, release the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any broken bones, repair them as we have said for the hand's bones; then put a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place the tablet that I mentioned under the foot, and keep it steady; and if there are two or three or more, break them and place a splint on each bone according to its amount, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the tablet beneath the foot; so that they may be above the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is important that you do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have discussed; and treat each injury as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For the fracture of the bone in the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, have her sit in a large chair, then tilt it toward the softer back and be held from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and insert as much as one stalk; then let the woman stand up, and slightly lift her back over time, until the cotton reaches the entrance of the nature, restoring the bone along with the stalk; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has, allow it to return, doing this for seven days or so: the fracture will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep bladder, tie up a reed at its mouth, and fill the entire bladaderwith liquid; then blow into the reed until the bladder is deflated inside: nature will mend the break. Then have it filled with cotton again, leaving it like this for several days until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the hand or foot is broken in man or woman, restore it as we have described for the hip joint; and these close fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and effort to this book. For a break signifies various approaches to the correct path of restoration: therefore let them do so.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the hand orde. Et quant cil a se tenee giseau de. En li est pierre of li oint la coure d’li. iauepare le poignie; and quoi l'oeuf à qui retenent, et poi ou en lesse entor sone the verde il nus, si tes ron nefecle de cite aui: li orde la bon vene est en. Enlores les soient li d’oigne que le est l'en eie, mette oe qui et seing a li ment entriestre the quis ests desment.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those who have a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be examined now so that the injuries we have mentioned can testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing, and there is no further dislocation from lead (verdigris), then continue to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, unless complications arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	the same;rings they other And there: J. Howevers so that det.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above where the head lies exposed, it must be gently aligned with your hands in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to align with your hands, then use this instrument of iron which has seven or eight branches and the width corresponds to the amount of the wound; therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to grip three or four (branches), depending on what he needs in each bone-breaking treatment; and let them be round but slightly thicker so they do not bend when compressed onto the limb during your work, and positioned forward with a larger part at the front:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche" because the shoulder head must be placed on top of the visible bone; and turn once until it returns, ensuring they are level with each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot properly grip the burt, then you should saw off the bone's head until the splints have enough capacity.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable instrument such as a chisel or saw within your ability; then remove whatever is lodged in the hardened bone and small splinters of wood.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure to moisten a piece of linen with tincture made from black oak gallnuts properly; do not apply any cerote or other substances on the wound so as not to cause putrefaction and decay. Then dress the area once you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound; ensure that there is careful attention to prevent straining the injured part with movement; many times such has been done by foolish doctors who caused deterioration or death in some cases. It should be less tight and more gentle than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is severe or large, and you suspect that infection may occur, as we have said, and there is pain at the site; it is not advisab le to apply dressing; but wrap around with a stiff cloth instead of bandages, then tie them. And when after one or two days you see healing signs on the wound, remove all that you applied previously, and use an ointment suitable for treating wounds, such as tetrafarmacoin and similar substances.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is settled and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary to equip the member in such a way that the bowel moves easily downwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And it is necessary to perform with them all, and the jor pees bones, and les petites, et tout ile ket m'il estrains bone, et pne la lores qui petie li coi et le ait il ne sient petits ou c. And they come it is de que se nus le soient deslies the lesselet les plaintues tu.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	When a fistula occurs at the site or another type of corruption, it is necessary to treat it as described in this chapter before. And when bones are broken and exposed on the limb, like those of the hip or shoulder, with similar large limbs, do not pull them, for many times death comes, but leave them until they heal; perhaps later they will be pulled out after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, just let it go.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Those bruises that come around the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the wound, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps they cannot make the member perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then be careful if the joint is hot: if you administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, frankincense, acacia resin, and other similar things, whether you choose any one of these substances or all together, mix them with astringent wine or an abundance of egg whites or liquid amber; place it in glass vessels, strain well without removing the strainer during the day; then dislocate, and start again with another until the inflammation is gone; or you may use a piece of plumb-line perfectly made, as its property is that it removes all swelling above the limbs; if the inflammamo
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	For the limb that is weakened after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	After the bone fracture has been restored, and limb that is weakened after healing: because it was too tightly bound, and did not move as if it had become loose; or because there were many injuries at his hand, and cannot come movements, nor suddenly. Or due to much of them with frequent; or from the wounds, and pains do not arise.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the care is to make the patient eat well and keep the body supple, until the blood multiplies in him; and provide baths for comfort and joy; then place ointment on the limb so that it attracts significant nourishment, and often raise it with water bandages, until the nourishment returns to the member; and it regains its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	And if the limb remains twisted after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	And if the limb remains twisted after healing, and the bone is severely broken, and the form of the affected limb is unsightly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that one should completely replace a member; many such folly has occurred in our land. These practices are to be blamed upon, bringing about great harm and potentially death. However, if the inflammaturi are fresh, then you must raise it with warm water or softening herbs cooked, similar to wormwood leaves, roots, and poppy seeds; and make a soothing compress, as one would properly do with diachylon, and take vismalve musk, and mix it with the fat of pork or oil from sesame, and apply the compress. Or you may use fig paste, and grind it with flaxseed flour, and other similar medicines that alleviate stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	At no time is an injury caused by rubbing continuously and long with wet hands. And allow for movement in each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted condition is aged and hardened like stone, it may require removal with iron, up to the bone, at the incision site lightly and carefully; then apply compresses and pay attention in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	by (th; and hipse c. Conto the "b ;
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, if it is appropriate now to gently bring it back.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because if you are delayed, and the head swells, and perhaps when resetting it is difficult to place back in position; for that reason one should not move it until it has swelled fully: many times this brings on inflammation and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Also when this occurs, then bandage the patient's head, and leave it so that the inflammaturms are calmed; then apply warm water and oil to the member, and gently move each joint as treatment is applied in its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	if s: c et de la ou:
des mandibules	Of the lower jawbones,
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the lower jawbones are slightly dislocated and their displacement occurs in two ways: either they are a little out of place and softened somewhat; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging toward the left side, causing saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held, unable to close its mouth, and enveloping its tongue while speaking.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the displacement is slight, they return in various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, one must reset it promptly without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in this manner, let the minister wet the head of the patient, and insert a mirror slightly into one hand from the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw inside the mouth; if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand be free, to maintain balance; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And place the mirror evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if resetting is difficult, especially when it involves both jawbones together, apply warm water and oil until they are lightly relocated; do not strain the relocation, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are equally relocated, and the patient's mouth feels quite relieved, wrap moistened cloths in a wax made of oil blend and beeswax, then gently bind them with soft cords.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two pillows, ensuring they do not move to either side or strain themselves, but instead gently consume nourishing broth until the pains subside, and the jawbones are sufficiently healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then gently move what it wishes, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is properly aligned and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and do not return to their proper places, fever and other familiar symptoms may occur, as well as possible stomach issues or complete vomiting of bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a serious condition; and often the patient dies within seven days if it occurs.
de la forcelle	Of the collarbone
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot be dislocated from the inside of the ribs and back, and never stays in place when it does; its absence is clearly felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then presses firmly with your whole hand to the wound, which will return [to its place]; then places a poultice and bandage there, and secures it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	en.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	The process of treating shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	. The  they p s the bones.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor within for the nerves; and on many occasions it dislocates downward toward the hip, especially in those with little flesh, as to these it happens quickly; but in those with enough flesh, it jumps easily, and reenters easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes this happens to some people as a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must examine it as much as necessary to be certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known when the dislocation is downward toward the collarbone, and there is distinction between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find obvious differences between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the collarbone to where it touches the top of the shoulder, as if they were eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand close or move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	, but li oment les l’oe ce and their pine de la ne sont bone et son se of le, and the eye hei lis est plie, just the beau saillus.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this manner of dislocation is not to be moved, except when it is recent or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is for the minister to lift the sick person's hand upwards, then place poulies under the elbow, and gently raise the joint back into its proper position; next, the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward again. Soon relief will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not return as we have said in days afterward, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and they should be rubbed with soothing substances, such as an infusion of henbane and fennel and honey-flower in hot water, and thus treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then provide the patient with a sofa to lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a strip of linen equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the foot of the mirror on the strip, gently lift the head of the shoulder, and guide the hand towards the afflicted person.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and other ministers wash the head of the afflicted person so that it may not move downward; see if the shoulder returns immediately in this manner.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and that you make present a person who is taller than the afflicted one; stand on their left side, and push the shoulder under the affected arm downwards, and lift it up so that the patient's arm hangs below.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other ministers rub the hand down to the patient's belly. And if the patient is too light-headed, then restrain him with something heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you can reset it in another way: and that is to insert a long stick into the ground so that the head of the shoulder feels as if it were on a pillow, neither too large nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then place it under the patient's head, but that there are sheets beneath him, and let the shoulder be lying along its long axis; then stretch out his hand to the other side properly, and the dislocation will return immediately.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Et si elle ne veut pas retourner pour toutes ces raisons que nous avons dites, alors faites cette cure : prenez un tison de deux bras long et quatre doigts large, qui ait le chef rejoint pour être introduit par front sous l'aisselle selon la forme suivante :
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then wrap it with two arms length and four fingers wide bandage around the head so that it does not touch the patient's chin, then place it under the ailed shoulder; extend both arms above the long rod, and tie the shoulder to the rod at the top of the hand, then put one arm over an oval slit of a wide shelf, and let the hands hang downwards, while letting the body dangle on the other side: the joint will soon be aligned now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Et quant elle est ainsi placée, dans n'importe quelle manière, alors il faut que tu mettes sous l'aile une tige de laine égale, puis applique le pommade avec poudre pilé, encens et onguent d'huile sur tout le bras et autour, ensuite étirez-la rapideculement sous l'aile, tournez le lien au-dessus du pommade, et enveloppez les mains à leur poignet de cette manière.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary for him to juice slightly as long as the limb is comforted, because it will heal sooner; and then juice again after 5 or 6 days, and move; and if it is firm and not softened, it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you apply three caustics as mentioned in previous treatments with cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it still dislocates after 6 days, and the joint cannot be lifted with either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the shoulder's head is pinched or stretched or softened; and understand that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the foot and muscles or behind it is made by impact, extended hands, and administered another remedy; treat until it becomes healthy again.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes tremors in the limb and delays in movement, many times the patient suffers so often until the tremors cease, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Hold that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by pricking and returns to being pricked; when it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, for one can see and feel it well; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated elbow with its bone, if it can be seen clearly. Because the joint is elevated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as an abscess appears there too, for if the abscess appeared there, it would be difficult to bring back; and by chance, it may not be possible to reset it completely in all cases, especially when it is behind; it is worse than other dislocations, causes greater pain, and possibly death occurs.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	When restoration is as such that it can be returned to its place, extend its hand to your two hands; and arms spread wide, and hands according to the cord around, over and under, reset the joint with all fingers together, or at the base of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, when it comes back as it doubles its hand with its own hand, and pierces from the base of the palm cord that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold with their arms so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a long and wide double cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the knife reaches the joint of the jointing with its handle, if it is greased with any oil to soften the joint, then reset the joint properly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, if you apply dry paste with egg white, then strain properly and rest the arm on a pillow, leaving it undisturbed for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place after release, leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart with the paste and apply to the area, leaving it undisturbed for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	If it feels painful after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until soothed; or place a greasy sheep's wool on the joint, leave for one day and night, then remove the bandage, and allow the patient to take a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it is healed, rub the joint well, then place the wool back on and allow another bath; do this two or three times until healed; if you see it dislocate again, put warm moistened wheat straw over it with butter, and bind tightly. It will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its return is easy compared to other joints; it must be promptly returned to its place at the same time as it becomes dislocated, whether the fingers are swollen or if there is pus coming from an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the method of returning is to place the injured hand on a table, extend its fingers, and ensure it's level so that you can put your palm over the joint, pushing until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Always, you must ensure that it's properly in place; then place the back of your hand on a table for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient place their hand's back on a table, and the healer positions his hand above the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, use soothing emplasters on the abscesses and let them rest until they begin to heal anew.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	If it cannot be tolerated, and you are unable to place it back in its proper position after several days, the dislocated joint remains twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and it does not bend nor twist to the patient so that while their hands are weakened, they cannot grasp anything at all: thus understand that the nerves or arteries are cut, if there is no other remedy but to grip with a fire cautery near the wound, and perhaps nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at rest, place it on the plaster as we have said, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and leave so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no trembling, then apply warm water for the hairs to loosen.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of a dislocation of the hand's fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	They are never reset to either side of the hand, neither at its back nor belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then the fingers are bent, and the dislocation is pushed into the pockets as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	the dis mon.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and do as you did before until it is set correctly; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Removal of the spinal column from the backbone
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several that are dislocated, if there is no treatment, as it hastens death to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	byt; (her.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times, one slips into four parts; that which slips to the rear is called "gilbosities":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment then is that you must straighten them if the "gilbosities" have come from childhood; there will be no cure or healing at all in this case.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from a fall or impacts or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment by many words say there is no great benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	However, I have abbreviated according to my intention, and formed extracts in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes upon the chest before it, there is no remedy or health.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that occur directly in the two ribs, and cannot be treated except for those specifically on the back as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then insert a hot iron at the head in clay firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a leather strap around the injured body parts, and another at the hips, ankles, knees, and wrists.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two ministers adjust the straps, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the two irons.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And they should be securely fastened, as we have said of the irons, and the healer places his palms firmly along the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	If it does not return through this treatment, take a stick three arms long, and check from the front, and let the patient lie on their side, and place the head of the stick under the chest, then position the middle of the stick along the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And align the feet under the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see this, make the turn that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And that you insert two pins at the head of one arm for an ample length, and toward the feet, with between each pin, above and below, an inch's width.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	In each piece, there should be one plug or peg that fits snugly into the ground so it does not move; and between any two plugs, there should be a turning peg on which they turn, and in the space of two turns, there should be two small plugs about the width of a hand's length to turn the gear.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the ligament among the bones on the gear towards the top, and the other ligament towards the joints on the other gear, so each servant turns their gear with the entire ligament as we have said, and the master aligns the spine equally.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is aligned properly, place a drying herb poultice with plenty of heat on it, then the ointment, and then the splint from a tablet 3 fingers long to press upon the site of injury and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient until they are well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	If any issue arises at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the spoon we have mentioned beforehand; and never once should you insert a piece of iron.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never should it appear in the lower back spine, and you suspect that it is dislocation; for this is the bone giving way, so there must be no presumption: lest death might come unexpectedly.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Joints of the hip and shoulder's joints come solely from dislocations, not like other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: inner and outer, front and back; more inner than outer, and slightly less so to the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is such that when the injured leg is joined with the sound one, it becomes longer and more swoln at the joint than the healthy, and the injured cannot double their knee over fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And there is the lump which is swollen from heat of abscess because the head of the thigh comes near.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And for those whom it comes to disadvantage, this sign is such that these accidents are contrary to the previous ones.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	When the signs appear in those before him, it is such that his leg extends properly; however, do not double bend the knee causing pain, and if one wishes to make him walk, he cannot stand on his own, retains urine, swells with anger, and as he walks, passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who experience it behind are such that they cannot fully extend their knee or double-bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, with reduced anger, and the head of the hip to the level below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The recurrences of this type of dislocation are such that one should remember that the dislocations were earlier, and they last according to their nature, there is no treatment for them; nor does it matter if he has pride.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In those cases where dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating: quickly return the joint, push it back in, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will realign itself, and no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	If it does not return in this manner, you need to summon a skilled minister and firmly support the leg with two hands or one bandage around the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends their hands over it in such a way that they place their hands below the ankles, then tighten a thin bandage around the thighs; and another touches the head with the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend outwards both upwards and downwards at once, as long as the patient remains raised from the ground in one go, hanging suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in four types, and if the dislocation has been reset as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, one must apply treatment to the type of dislocation. When it is in the arm, you should support the patient under their healthy side, then place a strap at the base of the hips, and lift the weight that is off the ground, extending the strap upwards towards the shoulder and outward;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then call on other ministers [healers] with his arms, and embrace the large joint of the affected thigh, and extend it towards the direction from which it came: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot grasp it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the afflicted together with a strong swollen band above both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended twice more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let it be hung from a log at the head and two long arms on the ground; then command one healer to embrace the chest of the affected thigh, and have another healers hanging with the patient who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns now swiftly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	When the dislocation is in the thigh, grip the patient firmly as we have said in those with sciatica, and properly separate a ligament on the affected leg, and at the hip too.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two splints, one on top and one underneath the foot, then insert a splint between the thighs of the afflicted person along the contour.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And wrap the area with wet cloths so that it does not slip off the afflicted person, then each attendant stands at his side, and the healer positions their hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, place on the table and press as we have said in dealing with bruises, and lay the patient down on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is to extend the injured leg quickly, and as I have said; let them lean their pain onto the uninjured side, then press with the other hand, extending towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is behind, you should not extend the injured leg downward or lift it off the ground, but rather as if the heel were dislocated to the back, as we have said about lying on both hands and knees;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it is as follows on its face, and the ligaments are extended just as we have said here beforehand, and one must press upon the joint to the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And it will be perfectly straight when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then place the buttocks, and put the plaster, and bind with a bandage so that the hinge does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let it rest for 3 or 4 days then release the binding, and put the plaster on; if you see that they are even as before, bind again with a bandangle, as previously done, and leave it. For 3 days; then release it and make the patient walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	The evacuation of blood in cases where there are injuries to muscles or tendons near a joint or bone.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joint is dislocated in three ways: namely, internally and externally, and behind; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it cannot reach his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back to his face, and put your foot under his.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	; a placie soce ce; That the mains.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the plaster over it, and raise the leg to the thigh, tying them together firmly for iii or iv days, then release it; do not allow the patient to move at all until the limb is restored.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb has not healed, treat it with strong binding as we have said in treating the hip, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully lifted nor fully dislocated, but sometimes within and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swoln, and one must try before the part where it has dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	s; Ift; ould pes Za; Kozmort:
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit up straight and support them with a board outside their leg, above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw out the leg towards you with your right hand, and then twice with the left. Extend it upwards, and elegantly lift the foot high.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this twice as we have said, extending and drawing the leg; if it comes back, that's good; if not, resume the treatment, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return thusly, lay the patient on their back on the ground and insert a sturdy stick firmly between their thighs, and wrap cloths around, so that the malady does not move.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then anoint the minister's thigh, and other assistants extend their foot near its hands or knee, so that it lies across the neck of the leg.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister extends evenly, and the bandages are placed between the patient's thighs to hold them steady as they are extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the pins equally for the dislocation in his hands, and other assistants anoint the healthy leg below, and the dislocated joint will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	t.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are relaxed, reset it; then on the third or fourth day, forbid the patient from moving with straps for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it approaches this term, do not be assured that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses occur, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	et la carme. Et it.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, then they must be extended gently without force, and it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in either the neck or foot, it must be made so that the patient sits on something flat or a straight table, and places their leg under where these joints are pressed, then firmly press with your foot until they return.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is even, and nothing appears, place a board under the arch of their foot with two wedges, then press firmly, and leave for three days, then release; then make them rest until they are well again.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not overly confident in the treatment, unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are merciful and compasscuos and patient; then do not be rash.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	the w as it ores:
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	When you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, as when an abscess comes near.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the limb is in place, administer soothing measures for an abscess if present, and treat the wound as needed with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	If there is a broken dislocation and you must extract small bones or bone fragments, do as we have instructed in simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	s
Explicit le romen de fisique	The explicit rules of physiology
