O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science assembly, along with its explanations and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I shall complete this treatise with this section, which is part of the work on hands, known as "Surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and performed throughout everything, its knowledge is lost and scattered, leaving only minor descriptions found in books by ancient authors who have written about it.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises mistakes and falsehoods, closing off understanding and dispelling knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I shall revive the essence of this treatise according to its arrangement of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other remedies from practice with the support of explanation and preparation as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters in our time are found, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those who undertake this matter to study the science of anatomy, as Galien says, understanding the judgment of limbs, and their forms, connections, separations, and knowing about bones, nerves, flesh, and the number of veins, along with the movement and flowing vessels and resting ones, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates said that without the knife there is little, and with the hand is much; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with what has been said before, beware lest they fall into error and kill people; thus I have wanted to warn many times against those who undertake this science and abandon reason for experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	In this case I saw a madman who cut an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and he severed the veins in her neck; for so much blood issued that the woman died on her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another fool who treated a stone in an eye of a man, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder, and within three days, the man died inside.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to treat it, and saw the condition of the foolish man and the size of the stone, and indeed if he were cut by it, he would die therefrom.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	This other wise woman took care of the duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was also a wound; the uninformed healer held the fracture near the wound at the extremity forcefully without letting any blood flow, leaving it like that for some time until the leg became completely healed and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come to him, and hurried to undo his leg; and when it dislocated so easily without pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the contamination was already firmly established in the member and could not be healed; it did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see one other mirror which caused a hardened abscess to swell up, then inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because an ulcer, when it is free of black bile humor, should not be touched with iron unless it can be loosened from the part so that all corruption may be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger in various arrangements; and I will show in each section of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to take care, so that the wise men cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in action, and approach the sick with ease and firmness, using the best way so that by God's grace you come to health and be praised; and leave behind ill-fated diseases of grave healing; and take off your armor from which doubt arises, and have faith within yourself so that you may depart from this world to the other realm of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien in some of his admonitions said: "Do not take lightly any ill disease, lest you be called mad by wise men."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire and medical caustics, and it covers treatments from the head to the feet; including types of piles, methods for applying cautery, and all necessary aspects in its practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about tailors and surgeons, plasters, wounds, arrow extraction, and similar matters; it is also ordered with instructions on piles treatments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	s
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we recall our work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of assistance and harm from each composition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of assistance and harm is like lengthy words and subtle science and hidden remedies; and on this subject, many wise ones have spoken and agreed with it; but their words are few, for I shall recount at great length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps all constitutions or matters where there is material; for two types of constitutions exist: those with hot matter and those with dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion combined with matter, some believed that fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others said the opposite: that fire cautery does not benefit diseases originating from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with warm diseases from heat or dryness, as it exacerbates them; those who say otherwise claim that fire cautery greatly helps diseases caused by heat and dryness in people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you consider the body of man and his humidity with respect to the hot complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I heed this advice.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And so, do not interfere unless you have tried it and know well the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human temperaments, and their conditions and causes of diseases, and occurrences and duration of time; we are not afraid for other temperaments, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the healers gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that the combination of fire and cautery is a secret of healing arts, and offers greater mercy than caustic medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	And as the membor quidemement of art cauctere de medicine. So tu fire and to let medicine de fence the arse.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Medicines with burning heat come from one limb to another in communication, and bring diseases of serious healing to the member; and sometimes they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The veins due to their height and the goodness of their substance do not cause this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experiment and long service in the field, as well as study that I have put into the art; and therefore I excuse myself for my lengthy words, because it pleases me not to take from you the secret which is kept or given forth by fire, nor the quality of work, how it supports diseases of organs, as the philosopher says in demonstration; thus receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when cuts should be made with a fire brand, and the patient praying.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	: laismen, the, whichnus:me: that they, and thise. And so s.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think even once, dear child, as the foolish physician does; for the disease healed by cautery has no return; and it is said thus; but it is not so, as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes complexion or dries humors causing pain, and it works more quickly than other medicines due to its efficacy and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the things that disease comes at any time according to the patient's condition and location of the illness and its strength are gathered in him through the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administerebt there where it has little superfluity and moisture, as with densifying cauteries for pain and other matters, but pain does not return often.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine; and it is true; but they falsely believe that cauteres are worth after medicine, when in fact cauteres are the last of medicine because we administer treatment methods for any disease which may be effective, then we administer cautere, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then properly applied cautery is among the last of medicines, not according to the whims of foolish miracle-seekers.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a surgical instrument made of gold is more effective than one made of iron, and they claimed this was due to the quality of the gold and its high substance; and they said that the heat from cautery does not cause putrefaction but it is indeed so, as I have tested it, and found that in some men it is true. Cauteries of gold are worth more than iron ones, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And even when you heat an instrument made of gold, it is not because of the color of the gold that it heats up quickly and then cools off; and if it is overheated, too much so it burns; and thus there are enough obstructions.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use fire cautery as we have skillfully prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I order this chapter from the head to the feet so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil caustery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	le t,
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by solvent medicine, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and temperament and habits of the sick person can endure; then return the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make the patient sit with a cross between your hands and place his hands under their knees; after putting the base of your palm on the base of their two elbows between them; and when they come to your arms, if it bleeds there from then apply the cautery called "olivare," which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the writing on the leg, and draw and strain your hand gently as you turn it slightly; then lift your hand very slowly, and return to where you see a small bone; if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you can see the bone as I have told you; after that take a little salt, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the wound, leaving it there for three days; then place clean linen over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon," until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	When ancient ones say that as long as an open wound persists, it cleanses more; therefore let it move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not irritate the fire cautery too much if a part of the bone is burned; and then treat those areas where bone has been burnt.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should not irritate the fire cautery too much, and if it's wide enough like the pins women put in their shoes for humors to flow out, then keep open wounds exposed for long; afterward, cleanse and bandage them properly.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of fire cautery do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, except for some men who have cause for fear; and it seems to me that I should abandon them; because the neck is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify with other limbs; likewise when the neck of the sickly is naturally weak, and the first appearance of fire cautery appears more healing and moving for me, so I work accordingly in this regard.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	And the persistent pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the head is chronic pain and lasts long, one should use years and pills called "cochie," along with the purge of the head and oils and poultices; if the fire cautery as we have previously mentioned is done, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	If the patient's head is of a strong constitution and not too cold, then you should cauterize under that fire cautery as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization to the edges of the head up to the bone as we have previously mentioned, and making a fire cautery called "vessels"; there are spots where one applies poultices; hold your hand so you do not see all the way to the bone: patients feel much more pain in this cauterization than others, which I will speak of elsewhere; it is necessary that the fire cauterizations at the edges be finer than those used on the middle part of the head, and here's how they should look.
dou cautere dou chief	of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in the head and the disease extends to the ear, and the shoulder is purged by cleansing medicines, along with other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases, but none help: then you make cauteries according to two ways, that is, with cold medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with cold medicine involves picking a piece of hair about two inches long and removing the skin and covering it with two small slices; then place it over the temple where the pain persists, so you can replace the hair shaft from underneath the leather; when placed correctly and strapped tightly, leave it like this for twelve hours; then remove it and bandage the area again, leaving the wound as such for two or three days; then apply a cloth soaked in melted butter until no more pus is present.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is safe; and if you see any of the burning remedies I have written about, or as described in treating with burning remedangs.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cautery of iron is made in this manner. Heat the cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole with a small protrusion and a tiny opening; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and slightly twist the iron gently until half of the point you desired has been scorched; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn further, allowing copious bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton wool on the wound and applying it to the area for three days; then you put oily cotton in butter, and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a fire-cautery called 'cultelare', place it at the very tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	From migraines
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery is made of medicine and iron without any effect, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellara" until it becomes white; and so place it on a tender spot for half an inch long, remove your hand once, and ensure that you do not cover the artery and let the blood flow up to the bone; and be wary of the jaw moving when bitten, and the nerves having only focus on movement without pain or spasms occurring in a bad way, and prevent any bleeding from an artery once it has been capped, or if there is great fear associated with capping or for those who are unfamiliar and untested; but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is capped, and I will show where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not relieve the illness and the patient is suffering greatly, cauterize at the head as we have said before, and care for the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we mentioned earlier or abscess extraction with a cautery that has two blades; and this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ears from exposure to cold weather
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from the ears comes due to cold exposure, and medicinal solutions have been applied along with other treatments we have mentioned in that section of the book, and if the pains do not subside, then use this cautery called "poins," which is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After placing the cautery all around the afflicted ear, where pain resides on both sides and recedes slightly from the base of the ear after you have reached with it; then apply ten pricks (poins) between each ear. Then cleanse the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	t a, that estrend le pe ciel byt:
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that must be treated with cautery is only those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make cautery on resemblances that come from bruises and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this resemblance of torture that moves from idles and purifications of the head and gargling, which is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little further towards the temple, and the third near the joining of the two lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, making the first cautery on the head of the ear just below a bit from the tip of the horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as one pace; leave the cautery until half the skin has been burned away; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the resemblance of the cut is as we have described before but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after curing them in place as I have previously stated, until they are healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and one at its peak, and one where they are called "vassels," as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery by the mouth of the stomach; apply them as we have said before.
de litargie	Lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient large years and purgative pills to cleanse the brain; afterwards lift up the head of the sick person entirely, and place on their occiput the embolism of sinapisperm which is written or mentioned in the treatise about plasters; this is how you do the cautery: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus, well done; and if not, make three cauteries in the area above the forehead down to the neck, with two inches of space between each cautery; treat as you would other wounds, and if they are close together, make another in the middle; and if necessary, place two others on either side of the horns, and treat until healed; this is known as an "olivary" cautery, as previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	For coldness in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to warm the head as previously mentioned; after warming the patient'ebody, make a cauterization in the area of the forehead and on each horn, then one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly from pain, and the illness is severe, create four cauterizations along the spine of the back; leave it until the skin turns completely red, then remove your hand. Afterwards, treat until healed, this being an "olivary" cautery as previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use iron caustic unless they are phlegmatic, and first must purify the brain with leeches and other treatments that we have described in the section when patients are large and suffer greatly from medical pain.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure, he shall gargle and chew to purify the brain often with good meats; then wash his head thoroughly, and make .i. caustic as we have said before, and .i. caustics on each horn; and if the patient is very ill and suffering, then apply caustics as I have told him who has paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine along the back and neck, and make it olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make him this subtle cautery according to the following manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted effluents and thick phlegm, then you cauterize the body parts as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them a drink such that the brain be cleansed, according to what it is in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	C's
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see during cauterization points on all the burn, this manner of cauterization soothes the brain equally; and then place cotton wool in butter and linseed oil.
de l’awe des eulz	From the edge of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the edge comes first as per the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protects from all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing to return his head, and making a fire cautery in the forehead, and making two small cauterizations on top of each temple where the nerves originate from both eyes together or from one eye; and bandage all veins and arteries that are under the crown so that the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood leakage, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the burning as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making the incision how to cauterize it; and never make a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	about the body's tears (meaning: tear ducts)
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and it is seen to be from superfluous cold phlegmatic humors, then you do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work descending on them: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries over the temples, and two cauterizations under the eyes; and if there is a need for more, apply careful cauterization above the eyebrows with small cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of wine; afterward make a fire cautery on the head, and apply an oil cauterization; and two cauteries with "clavelis" (a type of cauterizing instrument) above the eyebrows, one slightly below the hairline; and be careful not to damage the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cautery called "clavelis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye becomes softened by illness and moisture, then use this "cautery," which is called "olivara," as follows:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries on the two sores as long as they are like eyelashes; do not let go of the hand except until a third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	should beaux: Ouze pnaz by that t ; it'chin.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn to scales, and prick at their owner's eyes, prompting cauterization in two ways: by fire or with burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even; if it pricks at its base, one must hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are fully grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Once the hairs have grown long and evenly, then place the patient in a comfortable position; above their eyebrows draw a figure that resembles a moustache, and begin with the sign near the hairline. Then apply cotton soaked in honeyed egg white and musk oil to the eye, using this form of cauterization:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the wound you have marked with small and frequent applications, ensure the skin is properly healed in that spot; and signs of the health of the work are visible when the paper recedes, and the hairs rise to the length of oil; then gently wash your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burned area is healed; after applying ointment, continue until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come in and the paper is softened as before; then resume the cautery at that same spot just like you did initially; and if the hair falls out, continue cauterizing until the paper rises to its natural place, and it's even, without touching the bare skin.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery cauterization of medicines is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of bay leaves; then take French soap and lively salt, each one ounce, and grind them well together quickly, so it doesn't cool down, then sprinkle on the form that you made like bay leaves, and put over the paper; and if the illness is only in one place, work with a pinch, and as such, and put cotton wool soaked in oil beneath. And the head of the patient be in your hands clean and press it into the medicine, and squeeze every time the patient feels irritation from the medicine, for he also burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, apply the medicine to your wound properly.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the mordication (bite) is healed, raise the wound flap and see if it looks raised as if lifted by fire or incision; and if so, it's fine. If not, reapply medicine to the wound area until your efforts are equalized, and your eyes aligned; then cover with a cotton swab in butter until the scab is healed, followed by treatment of the wound bed called "dyafenis" and others, until it's healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And you must carefully guard your efforts so that none of the medicine reaches your eyes. And if the paper becomes soft again afterward, and the hairs poke through it, resume the treatment on that wound area as before; then treat until it's healthy; this is how a wind-blown fire behaves:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, be mindful of the limitations; and do not place the correct path before one who is devoted to this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For treating a fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not help, then it is necessary to perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	(prstroliud the ous and by pas qu: a mallemente de la bon les il oise prouss<byce tele s
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the abscess and drainage; and if closed, work on it, and push through the bend; then put hot caustic on it properly, and hold your hand to the caustic at the part without hair above the wound, so that your hands do not go mad; and place the caustic in the oil's fatty substance, and let it decay.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you begin the cauterization up to the bone, it would be best. But if not, restart the cauterization once more or as needed, and leave it for three days; then put cotton in butter on the dried treatment until it is healed, and after forty days when it is not healed yet, apply corrosive astringent medicine until the bone is exposed; then proceed according to what appears in your treatise.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of fire cautery for a fistula that the ancient ones did not mention. For an open wound and skin, after placing a very subtle stick inside it with its shape here:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it the quantity of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand firmly or something similar, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted into its place; and then one must put cotton soaked in this on the affected area: the lead will fill it as needed from fistula, and heals with a remarkable speed.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer a certain substance to the wound, and return the faster through the body as befits its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of ruptures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur cracks on lips called "hairs," especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small ring-shaped fire cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply haste treatment into those cracks until they are healed; after that, remove the wax layer until it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the incision of the abscess on the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the neck or in the eyelid, palate, or tooth roots, after decaying and rotting and becoming old and turning into a fistula; you treat it as we have described in divisions, but it does not benefit: then you must apply a cautery according to the quantity of the faster; after removing or opening the fistula, hold your hand until the heat comes out from it, and then release; perform this once or twice, after the treatment as we have described above, until it is healed; if treated thusly, it's good; but if not, you must expose the cavity and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your treatise.
dou movement des dens	Movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines when nothing else works, then place the head of the patient in a sling; afterwards dry the cautery so that the form will come after again in part as you put a wick on the tooth; and insert hot cautery into it quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the warmth reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and resume the cautery at your discretion; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water and leave it for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moved is secured again; the softened gums are held still, and the moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	To alleviate the pain of the tooth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold or heat, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cautery by two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is made by extracting butter from a calf, and shaping the end into a spoon of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and form a ball of butter cloth, and apply it hastily to the painful tooth. Perform this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth; if you see hair and cotton coated in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth and hold with a heated iron until the heat reaches the joint of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Cautery with fire is as follows: extract an iron or silver spoon, and make it large enough so that the heat will reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cauterizer, which causes a formation to come about, place it on the painful ton and hold your hand until the cauterer cools. Do this often, as the pain will subside either on the same day or the following one. And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter when applying that cauterizer quickly, and then remove it; this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform a fire cautery on the head of hair you wish to choose, and according to your ability; this is the shape of the wax.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by cold humors and does not respond to medications, then apply the fire cautery on hair as described hereafter, with two openings for smoke from the other part of the cauterization; place the hot cautery once or twice upon an abscess depending on its size until it reaches the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use cauterization according to its quantity and leave it for three days; cover with cotton soaked in butter as long as the sore remains. Afterwards, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moistures overwhelm the channels of the chest, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first purge the patient with soluble medicines; afterwards perform cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come all the way to the throat, but only on the skin. Afterwards make another cautery at the joints in the neck near the head of the spine, and let the cautery that is called "clavile" as we have described before; and heal the wound so as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	Regarding the chest cold
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	Regarding the chest cold, when it is caused by cold moisture and the patient has no fever or sweating, and the illness is early, perform two cauteries on the loins in front of the thighs; and another cautery between the buttocks; and let there be the cautery called "clavile" according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	When you see it, do cauterization by pricking at all the points referred to as "poins" from the previous ear disease; and let the points be up to thirty or more. After curing the issue as mentioned above, there should be three points in this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these points are lighter, you make them at intervals of three parts.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	For the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the evil spirits have been expelled from their backs and sides; then remove the kernel which is within the inflamed area of your left hand's thumb joint; and if the joint has dislocated, heat with a cautery that has two pointed tips as in its shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and heat the kernel until it reaches up to the ribs, with four figures of the cautery together; and since it is made with a cautery that has three points, for which the figures of cauterization are these three cauteries; and they resemble the nerves according to their subtlety like a tent, and it's the shape of the cautery that has three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it placed near this nerve, because of which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery to soften with soap; afterward let the patient rest and do not move their limb for a long time until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated again, little happens, then do cautery on the thick base of the clavicle, or many cauteries at once. For the joint is repositioned, and bone becomes dry and the patient feels better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	by; If you see sul monstral Prussons:s.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	They say that one should make root cauteries of Aristotle's herbs in this manner: take the largest possible root of Aristotle'e's herb, dry it and prepare it as long and thick as your fingers; coat with oil and hold over fire to cauterize. One large cautery between the earlobe and neck, two small ones slightly descending on the area below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, tilting backward slightly; one at the center of the thighs, another above the stomach, one between the inner sides of each shoulder, and two along both sides of the lower chest; do not press your hand too tightly but open it widely as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	Some old ones say that no man should use a fire-like cautery without resemblance to razors; heat it and place it between the ribs until reaching an abscess; but in this case of treatment, pain follows as we have said with liver abscesses. However, fear or illness may cause death at once, or a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.
de la mice	They say that no one should use cautery without resemblance to razors; heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; but in this case of treatment, pain follows as we have said with li abscesses. However, fear or illness may cause death at once, mice that occurs fistula cannot be healed.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mouse bites as previously mentioned in sections and it proves effective, then there are three ways to use fire cautery which are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One way is to make three or four cauteries, aligned according to the length of the bite, following the figure of the liver cautery as we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand too hard on any one cautery, while the patient lies on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Another way of cauterization is to use the one with two nerves as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and lift the bone where the malaise's edge comes from the left side, and make elevations to lift the bone according to its size, following the width and length of the body, while the cautery is wide enough for the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After he inserts the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced from the other side, and then applies the fire cautery to it, thus there will be four in total. And if you see, cauterize with all of the cautery at three points. Then treat as soon as it has absorbed pus over a long time, which means moving like the previously mentioned cures.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy (edema)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cauterization does not help with dropsy (edema), but in the manner called 'asclytes'. When you treat according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment is not effective, then it should be done with four cauters around the groin, one on the stompitator, one over the liver, one over the kidneys, two behind the back above the spine, and one near the area of the genitals.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the wound open to heal and allow for pus drainage for long periods, do not neglect caring for the patient after cauterization; healing will be hastened, and both intentions are with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen is to be a small nail as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what it was previously presented.
de l’enfleure des piez	Regarding the swelling of the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the fingers are swollen in the one who is jaundiced, and bright with yellow bile, you must perform cauterization on their back between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery to turn. And do not enter too deeply, thus it will squeeebore out the yellow bile, and be as follows for the cauteries:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shin bone; make the cauterization long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cauterizations lengthwise to let out the bile; afterward treat the other methods that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	For dizziness
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines flow out, they cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before or cauterization of the stomach, where the cautery circulates around it; four subtle cauteries surrounding the belly, all converging to one clavicular cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the remedy is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of corns (likely a typographical error in original text meaning 'hemorrhoids' as "emorroide" would mean hemorrhoid).
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the bunions are at their foundation, or one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have described in divisions, and if nothing helps, then do caustics: three on the spine of the back, those that gradually approach from below to above almucantarat, and one under each big toe.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then on the face do a large caustic as previously mentioned, and one on the liver, and another between the ribs for all other caustics; leave the caustics open for a long time. Afterward, cure him until he is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshiness called "thelulus"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you bandage the ulcer, first cool the cautery which appears like a shaving tool, and then set it all ablaze on that bandaged area; and let your hand and the cauterizing stick reach as far as the vein's source, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large cautery on an inflamed area, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the ill cannot endure bandages or dressings, we will tell of it in its place; if a disease comes that cannot be healed but by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When any comes fistula, and is old and rotten with decay and corrupted moisture, you must dress it completely subtly, and know the extent of the entire tent. After scalding the cautery which seems like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered the tent; resume the cautery as long as the body is at risk and corrupted until once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of flesh needed; beware lest you burn nerves which are therein, and great veins. If the fistula reaches the bladder and intestine, watch for these openings, and do not create a passage elsewhere than at its origin, remembering that it is not necessarily dangerous; after curing the opening until it is sound, if the opening is oozing matter, and materials have been present for a long time, then know the opening to be entirely healthy; and if materials are absent, understand that the opening is inflamed, with corrupted bone at its source. In this manner as one of those we will say in its location.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	For the tounz, li de la ou cest desai de plues d’ours tu l’ad ecrit. Le cordon neant les choses; orent sus le vienes prandans ses mains ester auet en lieu du ire sans lais quid f ados et s que il, et nos rons ouiement et li raient sus crainbaisse l’a.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, and the patient holds urine, then you make a fire cautery on the part below the bladaderiverance of blood when opening a vein", "and incising an abscess", "and in the treatment of wounds", "and in the extraction of arrows", "and cutting into stones", and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
de la marris	Of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicle is cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation; and when they come, it causes great pain: then one must perform three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said about bladder cauterization, and two on the back; and let the clitoris be cauterized, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the bag of the thigh, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the lumps have departed with their veins, so one must cauterize the patient on the bag of the thigh with a cauterization similar to a circle, and straight ahead of the leg around the bag as it turns, so that the bag be within the circle; and let the cauters be such as those which were used in cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si ces cautérisations ne sont pas présentes, alors faites trois gros cautérisations sur l'olivaire (oubit), et que la cautérisation soit aussi large comme toutes les autres; et continuez le traitement jusqu'à ce qu'il soit sain.
de la dolor de la hainche	From the pain in the hip.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient shows signs of what we have described earlier, and treatment does not help, and the illness has been long-standing: then you must purge the sick person of large humors with foul pills or other good pills that appear similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the method for the cautery is in two ways: one with burning medicines, and cautery of fire. Cautery of fire has many methods, among which one is as follows: you cauterize three triangular burns on the gusset area, ensuring good depth and size, and leave ample space between each cautery like an olive pit; never place a cautery in the middle above the shoulder joint.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see the triangular cautery that we have mentioned before for shoulder joint dislocation; but make it in such a way that the circle contains the entire gusset and all sides are burned away.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And here's the way to do it for sciatica when the pain is in the gusset and doesn't reach up to the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, you make two cauteries where the patient says the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four times on the left side a little; and use a saucer-shaped cauterization, and burn off the fatty tissue; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads up to two of his heel or near it, then you cauterize at the place where he feels the pain three points or four times with the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the work is necessary and if there is more; and if it has been that pain is below the groin towards the thigh, make cautery with a cutellary or circular caustic, and give good care in all your cauteries so you do not harm either the nerves or large arteries, and do not cause further harm or constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen others who performed cautery on the ankle joint of the foot, and they harmed it so much that the entire leg became swollen, as did the feet, which were then pierced and corrupted throughout; afterward, due to a stomach condition, he died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, do cautery on each of them according to this manner. // The wise men say in haunch cautery, which is as follows, make one piece of iron and let it be as large as a dactyl or slightly smaller; and let it have gaps between them and the space from one gap to another should be the amount of a pea'lete; and there should be two parts above each other, and they should also look like that; and it must have an iron rod well made; this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heat it until all is red and pus flows out, then place it on the chamois leather of the bad hip, and turn it over along the ribs; cauterize once with a hot iron and leave for three days; afterwards apply beef suet ointment, and let the open wound remain uncovered for a long time; after applying salve, do so until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cauterization because of its appearance, and few do it; however, these are good cauterizations, if the patient can tolerate them, and where they find relief.
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain in one's back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive bleeding, or from seemingly expanded cold matter, none of these warrant fire-cauterization unless it stems from an infusion of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has vomited foul pills or other substances, place them on their back where the pain is located and make three lines marked with incisions, and for each line 5 cauterizations or more according to the vitality and amount that the patient can tolerate; perform the cauterization as done by "points" caustic. If so, do 3 or 4 at the midline according to this method:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this disease comes to young children, and the signs at its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when standing up, and fear; you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and an appearance that appears above the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and have examined it, then cauterize with a caustic lancet as follows in this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the caustic affects any part of the spine, equalize it throughout. And if you see, then apply cautery around the spine with a lancet 2 or 3 lines apart. After healing as we have said, ensure not to place cauterization in scarred areas where nerves are present.
de la dolor des jointes	For pain from the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moistures spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes to the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and if it is due to cold causes and medicines cannot heal it, then they are treated with cauldrons in this manner: make numerous cauldrons around the joint of the foot, and let the cauldrons be olivary according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need to hold up the face of the foot, make a cauldron over all the cauldrons called "point". And if pains come near to joints and other joints, which happens often, make a cauldron on each knee 3 or 4 cauldrangs from each part; and with the olivary cauldron. And if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand away for longer than the color of heat is visible.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains extend to knees and back, treat with the cauldron as we have mentioned in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fissure 2 lines; and if there is no pain in the joints, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, treat each part, and do well with medicines for the sick. For if you treat them well and purge phlegm, they will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the disorder of the sighs
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When disorder arises and the bowels descend as limbs and it is newly so, when you see such need to cleanse them, do not pass any day without doing so; use things that relieve the belly so that the fetus descends from the womb. Afterward sit down on your back with hands placed between thine arms. Command him to rub his knee until the bowels are repaired and the limbs reset, then grip tightly above the disorder at the bone of the wrist, and sign as if a semicircle over the body; afterwards apply the cautery in this manner:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Do this until they are white and emit clear pus. Then reset the bowels to their proper place; and instruct the attendant to rub his hand so that it does not return backwards; work well on the legs of the patient, and place a cushion and a sergeant beneath the thighs, and another under the feet which you grasp with your hands; then apply the cautery over the mark entirely by stretching out both your hands, and continue until you reach the bone, if not on the first attempt, repeat as many times as necessary until reaching the bone. Be careful subtly that bowels do not protrude when performing the cauterization; do not burn it; and ensure that no harm comes to the patient or other maladies.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	When approaching the cautery to the bone, your efforts are in vain. It is necessary that the child's caustic be subtle according to their measure, and for large people also be large according to their measure; after three days treat them with a salve of butter until the burn has healed; then treat with other ointments until it is sound, and let the patient lie on their back 40 days until the wound is well sewn up; and ensure that its bandages are long-lasting, so that the joint does not protrude when they begin to walk.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	After 4eb days, when they wish to stand, properly fit them with a bandage and bear it for 40 other days; and have good rest, so that they work little and watch out against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and excessive shouting; and when this instruction is completed, then they are completely healed. And I will now say after the treatment in their chapter on tailors.
de la routure dou ventre	On treating wounds of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When lice come into other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be hot enough; after the cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a cautery at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the lice's head and make one line for the width above the louse, and another lengthwise, and place your hand amidst all of the fire caustic. However, the first fire caustics are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb, from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, with medicinal treatment proving ineffective, then it must be treated by caustication using the "point" cautery, applied according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and degree of pain. If healed after the first cauterization, that's good; if not, another should be performed upon it, as custom dictates that the member close nearest to being healthy requires this, hence caustications must continue until the patient is well.
de meselerie	In the context of medieval medical treatises and practices, "de meselerer" refers to a field of medicine known for its specialization in surgery. Mesellers were practitioners who performed surgeries such as trepanation (drilling holes into the skull), amputations, and other invasive procedures aimed at addressing physical injuries or illnesses that required direct intervention beyond what medicinal treatments could achieve.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Mesellers are known to have performed surgical procedures occasionally aided greatly by caustication, particularly in cases of diseases arising from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. Can you consider cauterizing, taking care that if the disease is at its onset, and if it is as we have said in the division, and does not persist or delay, and doubts whether the decay may affect the whole patient, thus .5 causters upon the head: one at the crown, another to the forehead at the end of the hair; and two from the horns, and the other from behind the skull. Let your hand that the cauterizer up to bone, so long until the dirt falls out as humors vents large, or may come ousture it out.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the melancholy is scattered everywhere and it manifestly appears, then one must use the caustics of these cauteries as we have mentioned earlier; and a small caustic where necessary, and two on the spine at the neck, and five along the spine of the back, and one large one above the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the shin tendons, and one over each joint of hands and feet, and over the palms' hollows; and beware of nerves that are behind pressing downward to not burn them; and never do a caustic above the bone of the wrist, or one on the bone of the stomach, or one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more caustics you perform, the greater the help and benefit to them; and understand that the patient does not feel pain from the caustic as a healthy person would because their body is already completely corrupted. It should be ensured that the caustics are large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the handling of iron tools. After treating them with farinade (a mixture made from flour) with honey and other things until they are healthy again.
de enfleure	And after treating them with a paste-like mixture with honey, along with other substances until they heal completely.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, if it is not healthy, then make cautery on the limb according to its size and importance; the cautery should be slightly transverse in relation to the grain of the wood. Then treat with ointments until it becomes healthy. At times, cautery is made on the hand, foot, and back, where a nerve causes movement in the limb, thus causing inflammation; however, none interfere if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the pathways of moving nerves.
de albaras	Albares refers to medical treatments or remedcuous.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as 'albaras' is old and medical methods are of no use, then cauterize with a small caustic application according to the quantity of grain in the wood until it becomes pale, and its color changes; then treat with flour, lentils, oil mixed with rosewood shaveby and plantain leaves, as well as colon blood and heron's blood, one part each. Mix everything together, bind it with a cloth, and keep it warm until it becomes healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When syphilis begins to appear and you see it can be stopped, caution by the fire of the cautery that appears as if a circle, around the entire circumference of the sore. Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also do cauterization at the center of the sore; however, I do not think this is good, for I have seen it become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to see it happen again; moreover, a more direct action is to caution around, with the fire called "circular," as we have said in many of cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	For the swelling that cannot be relieved
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When anyone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays dying due to excessive discharge or because of the condition's severity when they are very old (that is, too weak) with little blood, or time; and you observe them nearing death: then cauterize around many small cauldrons by pinching; afterwards leave it as such. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire area covered in cauldrons, heat the cauldron with the shape on it:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the midst of the disease called "adubelati" until the cauldrons have pierced the skin, and make such cauldrons so that the patient feels them behind somewhat like a river's flow is directed. Afterward cure it until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The care of fire wounds with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of illness called "corrodens," is nothing but a clot in the limb, because it eats away at the members just like fire dries out lines. If you see this disease present that can endure cauterization with fire, then apply small and large cuoya cauters accordingly to where the body or illness is; after cauterizing all parts until you have removed all corruption, leaving nothing of it, so that everything corrupted be turned into bone. Then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil-soaked bandages on the burned areas as long as the fire burns are healed, and all corruption is gone. After ointment treatment with charcoal powder; And if after .iij. days the wound does not appear healthy, then it's good; and if not, resume cauterization on what remains of the limb that has been eaten away. This clot was never successfully treated by ague medicine before cauterization with fire; but in any case, cauterization with the fire is more helpful, and I have already mentioned the treatment with ague medicine in a previous section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The use of pliers coming to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often it occurs that in the feet a disease develops behind which we call "closed," and is a large swelling causing pain to the foot. The treatment for this disease has two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating a probe like an awl made of good iron, so it can reach through all parts around the nail; there should be sharp edges; after heating, place it on the nail, then turn your hand entirely around the nail until it becomes red at its base; leave in this way for three days until pus begins to emerge. Then make an emollient of mashed fresh herbs and oil, and let the dressing remain overnight, after which the nail will loosen and come out with its roots. Finally, treat the wound with healing balm until it is healthy again.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	If they convert behind the body, and often occurs in hands and feet; then it is necessary that you perform hot water cautery: take a container of copper or iron, or an awl-like tool, place it on the nail with its base, this refers to warts; put the container around so it encompasses entirely, then add some warm water, and hold your hand firmly, turning back while pressing until the edges of the container reach the root of the nerve, allowing deep hot water to find its way down to the roots. Suffer a bit from the sting of hot water for an hour; then leave it as such, after which it will loosen and come out with all its roots. Perform again if necessary until you have addressed all that are on the body, then treat them with healing ointment.
li cure dou trembler	by. Then the s so please of the lithes:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of nerves, or fever quartan (quartan ague) or another ailment, it is necessary to make .iiij. cauterizations or .iv. on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the base, and one above the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will stop the trembling and remove the cause of the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	At no time should they appear on the body bathed or as pus-filled blisters that come from large corrupted substances. If at first when they appear, one makes cauterization over each head of the pustule: a subtle caustic stick made of myrtle wood, whose point is held in fire, or from long-stemmed aristology root, or with lenticular caustic. And if not at first when they appear according to this manner, and they cannot grow further; the excesses that come are broken, and it becomes healthy, but one must do so after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is tied off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great bleedings from the artery that has been tied off near the wound's edge, or at an abscess incision, or during cauterization of a limb, and similar things; it is very harmful to let them bleed out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case if this occurs to you, quickly place your index finger over the wound's vein and strain it very much until blood ceases flowing from beneath your fingernail; then apply small and large olive oil cauterizations with fire as needed so that they all turn red; then take some (ointment), whether great or little according to the wound size and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery over the vein while you hold your finger in place until bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps back when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do one after the other until the blood flow is stopped; and be mindful not to burn the nerve near it, nor any further harm come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly stop it unless by one of the four methods we have said: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or with a strong thread, or with medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and be tied and strained simultaneously.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tightly binding with cloths or applying burning substances on top, or other similar things if it does not help much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in someone and they have no direction or medicine on hand, then you should put your thumb index over the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out so that blood rests above the wound and vein; do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often until the blood is congealed, engorged, and pooled; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgery treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicines, and pustules, causes, effluvia, and forms of cauterization; I have included those cases up to the fingers herein, and will proceed through this chapter by the same method for what is easier to understand.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be taken.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In the practice of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening a vein, making an incision into an abscess, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, which leads to death in some cases.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to be reckless. For many ways of people come in healing matters. If they are from such who have been so overwhelmed by their illness that it causes them to die easily due to the distress they find within their disease, and its severity; and with these one must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these is one who gives you his attention and says: "Wait, I am ready"; but the patient is discontented. It does not serve to agree with those coming to you who have this manner, but provide greater reassurance in your honor than in your selfishness, and do not act foolishly but wisely on what you are certain of, and from which you can take lessons; and use prognosis and indication in treating the ill with whom health is converted; and this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory for generations.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to breathe of the holy inspiration from His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I order this treatise by sections as you see in the chapter on cauterization, from which I have advised about burning from head to feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water at its head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	That this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the child's head is too strongly constrained by the birthing canal; there has never been a case where it was successfully resolved without knowledge of its cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness in anyone other than children, and all whom I have observed it caused death swiftly; therefore, it seems to me that the treatise should be more diligently studied for such cases.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	by# s. Pruss.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is excessive, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in a cross-like manner according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are openings above each part of the head, and they swell forcefully when pressed by your hand inside: it requires that you make three incisions on top as follows.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	in thet les jeter les peircs: t’e ce est o cire, and toli, thatture they bile de quels il, ym:
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is to observe where the head of the abscess and water are collected; for it never lies before, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the head of the abscess opens, and water is collected; proceed as you are able with what I have told you; but be careful not to puncture an artery; watch for bleeding fluidly so that the patient may die from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	To resume (to continue)
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there occurs in anyone a disease called "catarrh" affecting the eyes or the genitals, and the illness is longstanding, and medicinal treatment proves unhelpful, then the final remedy lies in the cautery with which one ties off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore that when you tie off the vessels, the patient should raise their head; then rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, and then draw out the patient's neck at full length with one cloth; then check where the veins are after each ear, and they lie close together; then sign the eyelids with wax; then tie off both with a thin strip of two parts. Until the tail reaches to the bone, and it is done so through the wide gap at the top.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see this, remove the strip from above the artery and cut it off as with two crossing knives.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, it bleeds continuously without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not burst upon being felt, measure a length of .iii. thumbs (about 4 inches), then tie it off and cut until reaching the bone; put out .vj. dram (.26 oz) of blood as necessary, plus or minus depending on what the patient can tolerate and the reperfusion of the artery. Then examine the wound: if there is no sign of a spurting fistula upon making an incision, and pus does not come out, then drain the wound and close it, followed by ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	For inflammation or swelling.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When early migraine comes, and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headache and similar things occur, one is treated with methods of medical care and it does not help at all, so we draw out the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have written.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of extracting them is such that the patient feels a return in the hairs of his temples and hears an opening in the artery within the temple, as it opens well from its pulsation. It is only slightly closed like in some men who are too cold; if reopened, the patient pulls out strips of cloth around them, then rubs the area with rough linen, and applies warm water until the artery manifestly appears again; then take the spatula as described:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the pinchers, and separate it thoroughly from each of the sheets; and if the artery is delicate, twist it with the tip of the pincers, then close that part according to the quantity of its two heads. Because if not sealed, it will never stop bleeding entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the wound with vinegar until it heals in 12 days; and if the suture is large, it must be tied in two strong double threads of silk so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and blood flows through its length; then cut off the excess between the two sutures at the same time, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a caustic caustic until reaching bone as long as the head is closed; this is the final work, provided the patient does not have fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For caustics are helpful in finishing wounds; thus they are more beneficial for wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When extracting arteries, fill the cavity with old cotton and place well-made dressings; and when removing them, treat it with dry medications that produce char, and bandages until healed; and if the remnants of the vessel are as thick as you work on it, then quickly cauterize the area by caustic, or fill the cavity with vitriol and strain in your hand to make the wound cleanse, and apply cold water on the cavity until the vessel is frozen, and bandage the cavity with a cool water as long as it needs to be. And the aftercare of artery extraction is that you cauterize the opening of this caustic two parts, but the sharpness be well-made sure longer holders;
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When strangury is too tightly held, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a space as wide as one, and then when you have inserted both into their places, heat them with a glowing iron until they reach the bone, and tie off the vein in two ties; and let them be separated by the two edges so that this cautery is not too hot altogether; this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	From tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	; t.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they call it the ancient "contusion cure", and you should do so for the patient with this condition, letting hairs on their forehead grow, then make 3 incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; one incision is as two fingers deep towards the nose, up to the nostrils, and the other two are at a width of two fingers above the eyebrows, and beware of artery incisions that lie on both sides over the brows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And take a piece of sponge and plenty of cloth to wipe the blood away, then apply the spatula-shaped tool with its two parts that is as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is from the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the fat that is between the two incisions completely over the bone, then make a new cut from the middle incision towards the other end of the second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "culteral," and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And insert the blade cutting towards the lower chest near the heart, and the smooth side against the bone, until it reaches halfway through the incision; then cut off any vessels that extend from the eyebrows as long as the incision is continuous up to the one opening the eye, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other end; and then extract blood equally, and squeeze out the wool for the amount of blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each incision, and cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form; after three days remove the ligature, and treat it with a large quantity of boiled water, followed by ointment made from basilicon herb oil, and other remedebles used for treating wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	To examine the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come from acute catarrh commonly, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakened sight, and burning papillae; and hair falls out, and at times there is severe pain in front of them, and patients sneeze; then by these incidents one knows that such matters and those catarrhs do not come from any single vein, but rather multiple vessels are involved, and the cause lies within them.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision on either side of it; starting from the temple's incisions and continuing up to the bone, but ensuring your hand does not touch the nerves at the temples while eating. When the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto an absorbent cloth, then carefully place cotton between the edges of the incision with linen threads; afterwards apply cleaned fabric soaked in wine and oil over it to prevent suppuration; when it has set, treat the area with substances that stimulate healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat bran and four parts of cocyn grass seed, mix them together, and apply to the wounds to stimulate healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains or beasts or stones like iron, or seeds like peas and lentils, or fluids flowing as easily as water and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it flows from the ear in stone or any other form that does not fit the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear to sunlight. If you see a stone, then distill a drop of violet oil or sage oil, then apply extraction; and the patient will sneeze as part of this condition, and they blow out of their nostrils when sneezing comes, and put cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and place the ear above. This cure often works effectively; if it does not work, then perform extractions with fine pincers like so:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out due to pinchers, that's good; if not, prepare the extraction with a subtle double needle; and if it does not come through this, make an eel of iron and push its head into the hole or ear slit firmly, stuffing wax molten so that the veins cannot enter with the tube; then perform the treatment properly, as often the force comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a point of what is used for extracting animal beaks, and use some precise instrument, placing cotton inside; then press the glue on the wound or whatever, and apply the treatment properly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all the things we have said, quickly fracture the ear so that an abscess is there and pus comes forth, and swelling; and the manner of fracturing is to make the patient sit with their head between your hands, and turn the ear upwards, then make a small incision at the base or attached part of the ear near fatty tissue; and let the incision be as round as a crescent moon until it reaches the wound, then suture it as best you can, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's the form of this: and extract it make it so that are as the poisons. If not bee aministrade.
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision into that grain of sand. But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist due to earwax, until you have tried many times; then extract with fine forceps and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extractions are successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Therefore when the water comes in the ear, it is good for the patient to sneeze first and plug the ear with old cotton. Keep something on that same ear where the water entered. If it still flows strongly, this is good; if not, take many small pieces according to the size of your fingers and lightly heat them, then place them on a fire for a while; afterwards put one or two pebbles from your finger into the patient's ear, and let them fall out through the other side, and pour another stone onto the stone that is in the ear. Continue to do this with stones until all the water comes out completely strong, as we have said for the previous method; then if you see it, take a rod, put one end of the rod into the patient'eart, and keep the other end on fire until the softer part burns off; then make another set of rods to remove all the water.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beastie if it is a small body like a flea or similar thing, treat as we have said in division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, prepare extraction with forceps; and it's easier to remove what is inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations and their treatment, if the remedy does not work, then examine the ear under the sun; if there are no visible worms, use fine tweezeburns, and if they do not appear, take the cone from which it takes shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. Then insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of suffering in the patient, then fill up all along the cone; do this often until all worms have come out. If they don't emerge, stuff cotton around the cone as I mentioned with stones; and if they still don't come out, apply distillations that the ancients tested in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and distill oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is of the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It is made of silver or tinned copper at the bottom and over with holes to pour in, and on top for distilling; and to press the distillation through an instrument of well-made tin wire, so that you insert a needle and wrap it around with cotton as needed, then pour your oil or juice into the cone, and put whatever amount of medicine from your treatments into the ear, and let the cone be in the ear; then push the needle through all the cotton, and press with your hand briefly until the oil is distilled or collected out of the ear; and it smells to the patient inside, and make the distillations two boil so that it's distilled into the ear, but do not be too cold, for medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of eardrops
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no eardrums or ears; and the same thing happens to adults by a wound's bursting within the ear, and these ruptures come at one time fully in the ear so that they cannot be seen; and sometimes there occurs .i. small failure of sight, but the eyes see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore when it comes fully in such a way that one cannot see it, there is of good healing in various dispositions, and where one sees this, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammamation apparent, then the work has done all this space for which the shape exists.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be both before and behind all around flat, so that the ear does not bleed; if the inflammation is of a wound or body of the ear, then take with fine tweezebrs, and pull gently, until those cartilages are completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Et si les opilations sont émergentes dans l'oreille, prends un rasoir subtil léger et échauffe-le au feu, puis mets le corps de l'oreille. Si tu sens que la tumeur provoque une faiblesse chez le malade à entendre, percez légèreamoient, et assurez-vous de ne pas appuyer sur les nerfs de l'oreille; puis placez dans l'oreille un tampon selon la largeur du conduit, et enduit avec l'onguent égyptien.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Aucun jour ne passe jusqu'à ce que la plaie soit guérie, alors prends une gaze et enduise-la avec de l'onguent rose d'eau, et saupoudrez-le de vitriol broyé ; et si tu vois le gonflement de ler oreille, il convient de changer la gaze pour en placer une autre mouillée dans du cerotage faite avec de l'huile rose et de la cire, jusqu'à ce que le gonflement ait diminué ; puis panser tant qu'il soit sain.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	Et si un saignement se produit, plonge une épongue dans l'eau froide et place-la sur la partie touchée, puis utilise les autres remèdes appropriés pour traiter le reflux de sang par des distillations qui soignent cette affection.
de la char des papieres	From the papers of Char
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This small althel that comes in papers when they are moist and dry, one must stretch them with tongs and forceps, then coat the bottom of a glass beaker with its roots; afterwards place it over vitriol paste.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	Pour ceux d’hauz à la voies: cauterise, puis les s’il est mires, eus de recoupe the altheluze avec pieces de paste, et lues a pluse a le paste; car tu çeples and li altes.
de la gresle	Of gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come out of the skin something that appears as gravel in form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "hailstorm," consisting of a large moisture above and below; its treatments are such: be aware if it moves on one side or another, which is an easy thing to know; then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then use tweezamoins, and sew. If you do not cover sensibly without perforating the skin a bit, nothing harms the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with sutures and cure until healthy; but if small, make no forceful action, for ointments will restore and irritate quickly.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstorm is descending into the ear's depth towards the upper part, turn back the skin and extract with tweezers, sew it up and press on both sides; and if the skin has been moved by the incision, nothing harms; but when the hailstorm has been cooped, give a salty water oil to drink, and cure the hollow of that which causes irritation until healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	It is a fat that forms in the folds of paper, which often occurs in children but rarely in adults; it greatly affects their eyes, causing them to have catharsis upon awakening, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces with closed eyelids, sleeping, while moist paper covers the area around their eyes affected by exinach, which becomes apparent in oil. And when you press it back into place with your thumbs and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of the procedure is that the patient places his head in your hand. Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach contained on each side, then place it over it; and press with both thumbs from one side and another so that the exinach comes together within the circle; then make a small incision in the moist skin using a sharp blade, ensaturating:
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the entire piece of cloth between your two fingers and twist your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to press at the tear, that you do not move all together up to the head, so that you do not squeeze it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the protrusion does not appear at the beginning of the tear, slightly stretch the tear until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with linen and water, and place on the wound, and bandage securely.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for those who chew and place them to spoil the moisture that has remained. Then heal until it is dry. And if there comes a hot abscess at the site, then treat with emollients until it is dry.
des poilz des papieres	From hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper in a manner different from their nature and become aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about customary diseases like tearing up and softening of the paper as well as mildew, until it causes destruction to the eyes; there are cures according to four methods: either by fire cautery together with heat, or medicine for ague as described in this chapter on cautery treatment, and is made using incision and stitching or with cantharides, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the head of the patient in your hand; then turn the paper with its oil side towards your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that's good; if not, you should put a needle through each thread just underneam: and do this either at the margin of the paper or where hair grows near these strands. Then pull one thread across all the paper from the great edge to the small corner; then remove it from beneath the paper and close up the entire area around the paper, from the large edge to the smallest. After that, cut a single thread and place a small patch of cotton fabric underneath the paper, then cover the paper with an encaustic figure as if you're inflating bellows; and in any case it must be done according to how much hair is raised on the entire paper surface visible.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	If needed to cut a large quantity of paper as it is softened; then make the entire incision along the two lines you signed, starting from the larger part down to small; and let one of the fissures be near natural hairs in the growth area of a root, then insert the needle into either angle that can reach, then scrape off completely; then sew the two edges together with a single thread using a fine linen thread, drain any blood, and trim away excess fibers along the eyebrows as needed; but if this is not done, don't worry about it, leave the stitches and fibers for three to four days; then treat the wound without drying or constricting substances, because the paper will regain its strength at the site of the wound and reattachment, but the suture is weak (as say the ancients), and this process requires no fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you shape the paper into a form similar to a fir cone as we have described, with three needle-like holes according to the following shape shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then shape like this way of pierce in a hole two small; and then. Qui li fesse the figure is like this, so done into holes de la forme comme nos avons ainsi the form as it is shown as we have made a for to follow the thus hole according li fuelle la ours forme qui semblable:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the situation is not equal, take a needle or one with thread, and place it on the figure; then insert another thread near the large joint, and the second near the small, and evenly tie together both threads; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have sutured, as we have described, then stitch the two edges of the wound with a seam, and heal it until it is healthy again; if an abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointment.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And there is never a time when the paper hair turns back: if it becomes necessary to use what we have said about incisions; but the suture on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the wounds is as follows: and you must fold the paper and insert it inside according to what I have said, then make two stitches with a thread, and two fine strings as long as the hair and the width of the gutter are; then hold the heads of both threads by the parts where you tie the threads. Then neatly sew the one and the other on top of that lies above the paper oil, and pull out the two stitches from the two parts entirely; and leave it like this for some days until the skin heals and scars and shrinks and hardens, as long as they come out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed and the bandage loses strength, then treat until it heals properly; and when the wound has formed a scab and the paper peels off, leaving no hairs, you will make the shape of two stems according to this figure and in the quantity specified for length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	For the treatments are such that you take a fine needle, and tie one thin silk thread on it; then join the heads and wrap them together delicately, enscuing their lengths equal to a palm in length; then arrange in sequence another subtle fine silk thread briefly, and wind around the main thread; then place the patient's head in your hand and be near sunlight so that the treatments can be seen clearly, for they are subtle and small operations; then insert the needle through the entire length at the root of hair closest to skin, carefully piercing the paper until you run it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the shaft, and place in sequence that hair if there is one or two or three or more; then continue pulling with your hand until all hairs are moved along the thread with their natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the shaft is treated and hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the thread from below along all the thread that you arranged, until the shaft moves upwards through its root and can be seen by oil; then again you pull the shaft and the thread, trimming off two or three days or more as needed, until the hair takes hold in its place and grows over it. And if the hairs are short, add a long natural wavy hair, keep it alongside that which thou leavest it, as far as to let it grow outward and then lift it up:
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the decay of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or oil decay comes about in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural; it happens by sudden wound, cutting or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	In the case of which he is caused by cutting and sante l’esproveint; si tu ne se eulz aue quarte la coustume ou il est que li choses qui oitre les poinçe le maladie ollui dite de cuistis i, et dese nies.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your care is to ensure it does not shift from its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely remedies for this disease, so that it may return in its previous shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the pus which comes through the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident arises from wounds, incisions, cauterizations, and similar things; and the method of treatment for it involves you taking a needle with double threading, fixing its point in the pus, piercing through to the left side till reaching the right, so that the threads appear at both sides of the pus. Then extend the wound upwards along the entire length of the needle, and attach a spatulum wide enough for this purpose.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the alignment of the bone returns as it should be repaired, that is good; if not, take a rod and insert it into the gap, then realign the bone, creating two or three openings within the bone; thus, both ends of the incision you made have two angles each, so when they are joined together, the alignment should be as in a letter with one "L"; then remove that piece according to how much its edges need adjustment to allow for the bone's movement, and bring the separated parts close together, tying them off with a woolen thread; then continue with what we have previously mentioned about using softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a fissure or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a clean cut just below the hairline of the paper, and according to what has been said above; then between the two edges of a tent as I have described; and you must treat the injury according to its form because it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters employ all possible means to help restore the figure back to its natural state; and for patients, likewise, depending on what treatment and applications are required in various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	If the illness comes from a fissure or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make clean cut just below hairline of the paper, according to possible means all employ its state; and li masters wise as I have described applications various conditions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering occurs in human hands such that the paper above is well-adhered with the egg white, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it must be pierced at the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lifted upwards; and hold steady with clamps until you scrape off what has hardened into the delicate spatulamine, which is neither too rough nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer from overly aggressive or blunting the oil; and make your incision gently, allowing the assembly to reform according to its natural shape; ensuring it's whole, without causing fresh blood in dirty water, then rinse with soft clear water and colander; afterwards place a linen tent between paper and oil, and cover the oil with mull soaked in warm whey; after three days use the colander again and other remederals until healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It is divided into two methods: one that it can be nervous and the other is smooth, but a certain kind of bainnee conserve them as you needle; thus to cut as the paper, which may not be sharp, and the poignet le croie li cure et l’oller en la chas.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of the incision is such that the patient places their head in tune with your hand, then you work the eyes; lift the paper to your hand, then clip the nail clippers slightly thinner; extend it upwards; then take a needle and insert horsehair, or goat, or ox hair; and use a strong thread. Double the tip of the needle a bit and embed in the nail fold, piercing through the entire needle, tie the nail with a thread, extending upward, scrape all the way to the edge of the nail where the prickly part and the silk hair reach until the top head; cut off any remaining stubble at the root of the crescent gently, leaving the natural or root bone so that through the incision it does not typically seep. And never do you stretch just the nail with a clip, but only with the thread as we have said; then scrape until all the crescent is smoothed:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure that the crescent does not touch and break the skin layer, and that the prickly part is not pierced; after the incision, pour in a bit of burnt seal oil and also make a mixture with litharge coating, and leave it until the next day. Then cure whatever needs to be done until it heals properly.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle, and the knobs do not fit in, this type of fake nail has often been treated with medicines; they grow as I described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the oil for the patient, and take the spatula lightly cut according to this method:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and there is irritation afterward, distill from your mouth into an oil collier made of leadwort and red wax resin mixed with spelt bran, and apply the oil until the next day; then continue the other procedure as in this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil opposes you, as in case of a hot abscess, then dress it first and cure the hot abscess until it is clean, then continue the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh at the elbow hinders movement greatly by causing harm, suspend it with a splint, and bandage part but not all, so that tears do not come; then flows into the arm red pus which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the powder that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are men who occasionally have red powder that covers the pupil, and it covers the iris and restricts its movement and twists to one side, appearing like an acorn rosebud; and in such cases, the patient places his head on a pillow as we described for this chapter of incision of the fingernail and small forces by which you remove sebum, just as it is shown after treatment with this procedure.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and bone is exposed completely, apply oil of seal or you may distill collier rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton with a linen swab over it; ensuring the wound stays hot; if nothing remains there, and the flesh covers the wound, and you doubt that the abscess is still hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for an abscess; then return to your original treatment until it is healed, and thus a bone can be drawn into place using this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you balance the use of each weak oil from the natural way; and in cases of accidental injury, using iron treatments; and do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that this limb has recovered from the treatment.
des voines des eulz	From veins within the body
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Red spots that are covered over the eye disrupt its function and weaken it daily. Therefore, when you first look at the patient, observe where these red spots are located; beyond this, there is no other disease except for the red spots; then treat them as follows: instruct the sick person to place their head on your hand, and gently suspend those veins all around according to your wisdom, and let them be doubled in subtlety following this method.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there shall be two veins looped by degrees into one of the arms as follows:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you shall carefully loop those subtle veins and draw blood every hour until you see them removed from the eye area; and be careful not to bleed the tips of the eyelash grooves, and perform this procedure at midday before sunlight, being very focused on your work so that only these veins are bled; and once you have done this, distill in the eye's collar a green and red liquid to disrupt whatever remains from the red spots.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot grasp all of this in that hour, apply an ointment soothing the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the patient feels confident about a boil, then resume according to this method above until they are well; and this is how strength is restored.
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mires called "arissati" fistules: when you treat them with cautery and medicine according to what I have said before, if they are not healed, then make an incision over the boil where it must die off, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see corruption and darkness, return it to all the instrument from which its form came; called "sharp head," made of fine iron, with one end sharpened like a file in this present shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it back onto the bone with decay, then turn it between your two fingers, and press slightly with your hand until you know that the decay has been resolved; do this multiple times before replenishing its location with curative herbs.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is sealed and hard, and the body of the bone is also hardened, and remains so for 40 days without new sores appearing, and no complications arise, know that it is healing; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to its original state as follows: and it is to uncover the bone a second time with iron, and using aggravating herbs, and when it has been uncovered again, take a drill according to this form; and let the sharp head of iron have four angles, and the shaft be thinned up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it against the bone near the cheekbone and move your hand slightly away from it. Turn back to its original position until it pierces through the bone and the patient feels pain because of this if he holds his hand on his neck; then restore the original position with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when pus forms and hardens in the glands, the matter goes towards the neck; this is an easier thing for the ill.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the oil (pus)
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the nails are torn through all over and it does not come to disturb the kidney or shrinkage, then you bind the sickly; then cleanse them, then put on compresses or bandages without iron that can be pierced to drain, then apply oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolum. Then strain the pus, and place a plaster over wounds with cloths and linens; and managing the cloths so you pick light enough cloths sufficiently softened by twofold each (i.e., doubled), then put one on top of the other according to as much as the pus has need; then strain it using a hard plaster, and again start leachers for draining without piercing them; then remove the compresses and let the pus stand all day and night, and if you see it softens much, so that you should be removed. Then remove it after the oil returns, is good; or else repeat as does not return plasters, cloths of the (it heals; and s:
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a bandage applied
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the applied bandage, then open and arise from fragments as if a grain of resin, and are visible to see; therefore you shall view it closely; then surgery is performed such that one inserts a needle at the root of the part below until there is another on the upper side; or where there is double thread of the forehead; and pierce through it; leaving the first needle according to its arrangement; then cut off the double thread in place, and tie up an end of the bandage around it, and hold it tightly; then extract the needle and apply a moistened swath abundantly over it; and leave until the threads tear through the bandage, then treat with soothing things as long as the wound is healed; and at no time should the wound be restrained by the bandage in any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give a significant appearance, pierce at the subtle base which comes in through the forehead and follows the white moisture and descends into the eye, and enters immediately; then extract it as soon as possible until healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called 'alcunnati' is not just water that appears to be coming down like clear liquid in the eye, but it is not; the appearance of its operation is such that you make the patient sit on a chair with one side adjusted and level, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move them as long as you see the bow coming up towards your eyes; then it should be pierced, and do not drain or clear away the lymphatic vessels, and observe the patient's symptoms as usual; if they don't come down, know that it is water, and if the disposition of the bow has been prepared as we have said. Make them sit between your hands again, then take a thin spatula and press on the cornified edge with slight pressure along its continuation with the cornea and crown, until the bow comes out; when it does come out, drip warm honeyed water into the eye or boiled fenugreek mixed with honey, then cure it with another remedy as long as it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of waters from the eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have observed the similarity of dislocations in the division and that which is to be cut; thus, proceed according to health conditions. It must be done so that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight for safety, and tie the cloth tightly with oil; then place the paper over the oil on your left hand if the eye is turned outward or on your right hand if it's turned inward; then take in your right hand, if the eye is turned outward, the instrument called 'almagda', or on your left hand if it's turned inward; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by moving a ray from the outer edge to that side of the oil at the lesser outer corner, and insert the instrument gently, rotating your hand until you pierce into the side of the oil, feeling as 'alamoida' comes to an empty space; and it must be ensured that the direction of the 'almagda' is straight from the full measure of the space which extends from the plumule up to the end of the blackened area; this is the crown of the eye; you will see the bone in the paper due to the whiteness of the horned thread, and then place the instrument close to where there is moisture, and afterwards squee groin. If the moisture flows out now, you will see before you the patient and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a little, and when the moisture rises in the second way, put oil with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise further, gently twist 'almagda' with your hand slightly; then reinsert some gemstone into the eye and cover the inner part of the oil. Then place an oiled cloth or a linen soaked in oil, generously covering the area, and secure it with clean oil. We, and those of our time, apply comfrey paste liberally along that area.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Pierce then the joint just slightly, not too deeply, but make it a very thin cut, then apply medicinal ointment as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient an appropriate bed in which they can lie on their back in a dimly lit room; ensure there is no movement from them, provide light foods, and do not move their head or arms to either side, keeping them according to their natural position until after three days; then remove it from that dark chamber, test their vision, show them various things, and then reattach the ligament up to the seventh day; and one should not perform this during the hour of treatment or immediately post-incision, but rather at an appropriate time because the healing progresses rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess comes forth, you should release the oil before the seventh day and apply what soothes the sore; and once it is calmed, remove the dressing from its face with a bandage to cover for any number of days, keeping it in that dark house. Then gradually leave the dark house little by little, and let him return to his own affairs; remember that no novice should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Apply the oint soi qui tu est ardre de nos que tu esoie te tesmoient, nul leus a li vant se veut conter lor pais ne pas on les dous onsue que tu s’est parfait, mais quaies et prist ; et la terse en faus ei qui descez.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of amalgamation because those who do not know them regard them as such; and they are indeed mixtures.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let there be the essence of this same subtlety, and its counterpart in three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	from the fire on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	the un:
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If anything remains that cannot be closed, apply all the subtle remedies lightly, ensuring nothing is left; and if there is swelling or an abscess, treat it as required; and if malignant abscesses are present, quickly cauterize until they are cleaned out and bones exposed, then pour water, oil, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the treatment fails and moisture reaches the palate, ensure it is safe; and if moisture does not penetrate as required, check that food has been lodged in the bone above, then apply remedies do not cut without proper sizing: thus, wrap a linen thread slightly thickened by hand, leaving enough space between each layer; place the head on one end of the string with some leeway. Do this until it can be pulled gently through the mouth; this is often done for schoolchildren and is an easy task for those willing to do so; then hold the upper part that comes from the nose in one hand, and the lower part coming out of the mouth in the other hand, feeling each alternately as we feel with our fingers. Continue until you know that we have cleaned all food particles, then pull on the thread, extract blood if present, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment, then place it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more until the ointments dissolve what remains of the debris; then put a pincenez in the nose for several days until safe; and use dry medicines if necessary. This is the method to purge the head, by which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostr [Input]
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	things as are the in, and s. 1 so
de la char sor le neis	From the cartilage at the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times arises at the top of the neck a disease called "tellus," which grows and becomes visible until it can be seen; therefore, it is necessary to cut it out from the beginning, removing all the bone strongly, then placing the cautery or hot medicine on it; if it is not removed promptly as it grows large, take heed if it is hard, of sick color, lacking sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an incurable boil, for when it is cut even once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the boil is from a severe irritation, not of sick color, and you see that all can be covered, then relieve the patient and cut without fear, curing dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut and healed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions of continuation come into one of these cartilaginous works, it is not very effective in some people. Therefore, when this occurs with anyone, examine if the wound is fresh and bleeding throughout; then bring together both edges to a stitch and treat until healed; and if the edges are detached on each side, trim all parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring together both edges to a stitch, bind it tightly, sprinkle with powdered blood dragon's blood, and crushed incense; then place over the powders a piece of lead or other lead compound, leave it until it exudes through it, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitching is that you assemble the sutures: by needles as we have said in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When dense abscesses occur, resembling grains of pepper, small and large; then it is necessary to return the lips, cut on each side with tweezebeak, and grasp in each part; then place the liquid after vitriol incision dripping until it cools off; then provide relief and treat dryness around it until it heals.
de la char des gencives	From the decay of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often arises on the gums decayed, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary to hold them with pincers, cut at their root, and let blood or sanguine flow; then apply vitriol incision, or other powders that restrain and dry out; if that decay returns after the incision, and often happens again, re-capping and cauterizing: it does not return after the cautery; these are the forms of ulcers to heal.
des sordens	Of sorrows
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At no time are they gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, sores that are ugly and sharp; nor do the teeth become black and yellow or blue until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell bad. It is necessary for you to have the patient sit in your hands, with their heads on your altar, and pull out loose teeth or sores as they appear, until nothing remains; then make it black and green, and yellow and other colors until they are healed; and if anything that was at first reason is removed, it is good. If not, start again from the second day to the third, until you have everything extracted; and know that teeth need various kinds of medications for recovery according to what the work shows, because the rasor whose teeth fail frequently require different forms than those whose teeth are between the gums; these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you delay the grinding as long as possible, because it must not always be done; for this is a very high substebisituations such that there are no excuses for extracting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained by tearing, it is necessary to be certain about which tooth hurts. Often the pain torments the sick person, and they think that it is a false or dead tooth; then they pull out the bad tooth; however, the pain does not leave due to this, until the evil has been removed, as we have already tried with such cases; and when you are well certain about which tooth hurts, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth thoroughly to protect the gum from all sides. Then move it slightly towards your fingers or delicate pliers at first touch and gradually until it is properly aligned, then firmly secure the tenailles; and let the head of the shoulder be in its right place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After the tooth is extracted properly and if it does not break easily, take any of these substances and fill them into each part lightly, and move as you did initially. And if the root is pierced and mingled, it is necessary that you fill it with dressings, where the openings are; and gently strain with pliers so that it does not break when extracted; and work very carefully around the gum to protect the to
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Etre, mais cez ement: en crois a li par la dent les dent dose et qui brise teve sesque que nos replee ce quidontre l'en de melenent auquoient l’amorent lionce leu; si. dit; et; Et dure, tendre, les croisse estes; andel; li amis otre la dent par moi en bonde96: li qui par sablest si bris, mais quil eco que te de meur, puisent ce l’on le miege. 82 li retenir et, nee nusie aves.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the strands, to which one must move the ends first, are with long points and thick knots, so they do not double when you pull the thread; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members such that they do not bend when pulled, and made of well-crafted iron wire, with teeth for easy handling.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the strands
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	the  (some. This. If they present que c sud.n and its;  is. are yourovleur est ca blacse bon. What islacks prumbons byz
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you expose the flesh entirely around the root and use the instrument called "althali", which is a lever of this form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And make it long and thick so that it does not break, and if the root protrudes through this, it is good; but if not, use all the instruments, from which these shapes come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument that has two tines, here is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other things related to swellings, and this instrument which appears like large pincers, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument should not be able to break; there are many swellings of swellings; and other instruments that are not counted as such. The wise master craftsmen discover by themselves their tools according to their works and the illness shows them so, for there are various diseases or no previous teacher provided an instrument for its variety, and it does not break on the wheel or other bones where they fracture; then seek swelling instruments as I have told you, and aid with gestures - this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and hold well to grasp the bone without slipping, but also to grip it firmly and remove it; then restore its original position with suitable medicines for that purpose. If there is rot in the bone, and it's small, you have all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with natural law, and the shape is unattractive, especially in maidens, it must be known if the root exists behind the tooth, and is neither straight nor properly placed; then file it down. And if there's a nerve accompanying the tooth, take this instrument whose form is as shown here with a small beak, and should be made of iron pointed at both ends:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And grip the instrument lightly for days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others; if it is possible to file it down, then grind with a portion as shown in this form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also as the grinding of needles; and gently grind the tooth a little each day until it can be removed; then smoothly finish with a file, ensuring that if the root is too sharp and cuts the tongue, you must grind down its harshness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth are loose due to impact or decay, and the patient cannot press down on what they chew without causing pain, you should treat them with binding medicines; however, if that doesn't work, use a gold wire for restraint as silver wires become green and corro#se, but gold does not change. The wire must be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; if you need to straighten the teeth, take a doubled wire fitting snugly between two healthy teeth, then insert the ends through the gaps where there are one or more missing teeth until you reach another healthy tooth. Then continue covering up to the part where you started and slowly extract your hand without causing movement; also be careful at the root of the loose tooth so it cannot slip away. Cut the wire with pliers, then reattach them and place between a healthy tooth, ensuring they do not touch the tongue; leave as tight as possible for as long as you can, if it loosens or breaks, use another wire; this will stay in place for its full duration, forming both the shape of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy and missing ones as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And if the teeth fall out, put them back in freshly as we have said; do not interfere with someone who is neither wise nor patient, and never create a shape like an animal's tooth bone, place it where there is a gap, and restrain it as previously instructed, staying this way for long periods.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of the tie of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	At no time is this tie of the tongue which comes from under the tongue or its nature, such as when made in this way; or by accident of a quickly-healed wound; and the treatment is such that you treat the mouth with the patient's bad breath, keeping their head upright, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous tie on the sides so that the tongue can be freed from its place, and if there is hardness or knots, and it is a quickly-healed wn, so you remove the sinew with scissors until cleared, and be careful not to sever too deeply as an artery lies below; and once done, raise the gauze of rose water and ease, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and treat the patient each night so that their eyes cannot close. And if bleeding occurs, apply vitriol paste on it; and if blood does not stop, cauterize with a lentigo-like cautery which is good for this, then heal with another remedy until it is healthy
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be colored or black and hard, do not touch it as the patient does not feel it, for it is cancer; and if it starts to sink inwards with moisture, pour onion water over it, and treat it from all sides with a fine syringe, and free it from both ends; and if it persists after your treatment, apply vitriol paste until it heals completely, then return to the previous treatment until you have treated thoroughly; then raise the gauze of eased and ease water, and continue other treatments until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Never comes to the throat bumps called "godath," and properly they are the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they do not heal well, take care: if it is a small abscess with flesh color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, also do not touch it with iron; but for the blood flow, let it be until it scabs, and then you will cut it off, or it will break on its own; and if it is a pale color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument carefully, but first check that the abscess rests calmly and is soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, with their shoulders in place, and they work the mouth and have the pus between their hands, pressing the tongue down from all over the instrument; and it should be of silver or fine steel as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	, asse tu thet cest en pus to let not prise ande ate; then be angrys.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	When you do not have this instrument at hand, use a pair of pliers, which is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and when you have caught up one of the almonds, cut the other in a similar manner, then after the incision gargle the patient's throat with warm water, vinegar, saltwater, and if blood discharge occurs, gargle again with warm water or grated pomegranates or myrtle leaves; until the wound is healed. And no other abscesses appear in the throat except for the two almonds, so cut them as well.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess inside her throat, which was very swollete and nearly closed the entire throat, such that she could not breathe or eat through the blocked passage, and if it had continued for one day or two days, she would have died; the abscess was so swolled up that it had pushed out two inches from the two openings. I quickly acted, inserted a needle in one opening, pulled back the contents with forceps, and extracted a large amount of pus; then I repeated the process on the other opening, pressing the mouth and tongue; after inserting another needle into these abscesses, and sucking out part of it, but only a little pus came out. Thus, I cleared the passages in the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop draining this abscess for long periods; the abscess kept growing back, filling up the space that I had emptied until it became much larger; then I deceived it and cauterized inside her throat: thus it stopped swelling. After me, only God acted on it afterward.
de l’uve	From the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When veins descend into the eye and it becomes swollen and elongated, then call it "perpendicular"; if it is thick and round, call it an eye. If it has been treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the wound begins to heal and is subtle, it requires excision; and if it is assembled and not elongated; and it is bloody or of flesh color or black, then it requires making an incision. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as I have described in terms of its blueness and length, make the patient sit before the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then insert a needle into the eye, and push downward, and excise at .i. of the .ij. strands that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it is necessary that you do not excise more than the superfluous part beyond its natural limit; for if you excise more, it will harm their voice and speech; and after the incution, use what we have mentioned in the incision of the .ij. almondcuits. And cure until it is healed. And if the patient fears being cupt, then it is necessary to use a device for the sensory cauterization of their sense of fear. The manner of this caustic treatment is with clear water. And ensure that the patient places his head in your hands and then presses their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or the chapter on caustics; confuse it with clear, living blood vessels; and fill the cavity of this instrument as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	What is the ouem sont l’est tout lemeet, si que tu met les coure lemede ce qui emmet en la medecle. Si tu coumest li est toutes le mte coure eltie luesse li medicine tous les cheut neant de coute coton le poutrescument sont ceste li venter, si que les .i ques tellel et mete ceulements qui tout ce la medec:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is better than the incision, not the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and ysope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of these in a pot, and set on fire easily, and the pot well glued with strong clay, and within the pot have an instrument tied according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it be of silver or copper, and one of the heads inserted into the mouth as long as the fumes rise to the eye through the vein, until the vein is suffused; restart often, as long as the veer dries up, and ensure that you do not commence this at the onset of a hot abscess, for many things may happen; and do not use it only when there's a decline in a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a vein and place inside its head a piece of wax so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; because the wax piece will not make the fume burden the mouth, and it is good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Take a lor poignant la morsure qui se tierz les pais:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	When the inflammation is bent at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and watch to ensure you do not touch the epiglottis, as it may swell or move bones within; gently guide where the patient places the instrument because they will use muscles or the area is sore; then push upward or pull downward uniformly throughout all of the instrument until it feels firm.
de la sansue de la gorge	For throat swelling
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	When swelling in the throat does not respond to medicines as previously mentioned for treatment of diseases; and if it proves ineffective, then examine the patient'cued at sunrise, pressing their tongue with the instrument I described earlier. And if you see a swelling, treat it throughout all using tiny pincers or delicate tongs that are suitable for this purpose. If this doesn't work, take an egg yolk and blow it into the patient’s throat, then immediately followed by hot iron application as frequently as needed. And if the afflicted person is swollen with water all day, then prepare a full glass of cold water, have them hold it in their mouth until they feel like swallowing, and move it with their hand often; and when the swelling feels the water, let it drain out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If it does not come out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with vinegar using the instrument mentioned in the vein fumigation; do this many times, for it will be difficult to remove otherwise. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot filled with charcoal and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and through there place the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts their head into the vessel, sealing their mouth so the smoke does not escape but goes directly to their throat; this will cause them to vomit now. If it doesn't come out, restart the fumigatur many times again; let the patient suffer thirst, and eat dirty things mixed with salted water, and don't drink any water; then they must be made to excrete through this method of treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used for throat treatment is such that it can be seen to resemble curved pincers designed for entering the throat; and like a physician's spoon, and it has roughness from lime so that whatever it grabs cannot escape. And here are its proportions:
li chapistres des apostemes	The form is made of instruments resembling a physician’s tool, such as it grains, and does not:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, as we have learned from one and another in this book, and they vary between perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways - the first way has the same appearance, and because it holds moisture. The second manner is for those cases where there are heads or when they occur on the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses at the elbow joint are different from those occurring in other joints, each with its own judgment in operation.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If there are abscesse which should not be perforated until the bowl is fully healed according to its completion; and for those such that it must be perforated when they have ripened, but do not die in accordance with their completion, as an abscess near joints. For when abscesses occur near joints, if left to dry completely, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near a main member, do not delay perforation until it has fully healed; or if it is near the base, pierce as soon as it ripens; and you must not pierce an abscess before digestion is complete, except for those at the base, which should not be left to dry entirely but extended internally, so a fistula may occur; and cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And the pain and the9412-380.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that bulge, according to the affected part. And when abscesses occur in place of charnels, they should be left untouched until digestion is complete as we have said; for if you pierce them too soon, the venom spreads throughout the body and it becomes filled with much filth; and sometimes the edges harden along with the deep-set areas. And in any abscesses that are felt according to their size on the body, do what is necessary for the part where they occur. Therefore, small abscesses should be treated with small punctures; large abscesscups with larger ones and multiple openings according to the appearance of the extent of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or their necks require sealing and dressing when they have become as flat as a piece of cloth, it is necessary to treat them similarly to how one treats hollows: and for those with three angles, or like bellows, and others that are roundly excised, similar treatment should be applied.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those without a head like superficial abscesses, it is necessary to puncture them openly; and if the abscesses are large with a wide opening, pierce but not emptying the entire bubble at once, but part of it; then bandage the abscess until the next day, then do nothing further; repeat this process gradually over several days until completely emptied. Particularly in weak individuals, pregnant women, small children, or elderly men with decrepit strength, the eyelids may flutter at times due to the bubble's release, which could potentially kill the patient, so be cautious. Therefore, avoid this procedure without great care and after piercing the abscess, examine if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a clean incision, dress it with linen or old cotton bandages; and if there are large abscesses with many punctures, make each bandage touching so they press against one another; and if you have sealed part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old cotton or linen rag shreds without moisture, securely tie until the third day; then remove it and apply ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	s0sce icilement en teyde
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is essential to know for treating abscesses; now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where small abscesses come from and are treated like the follicles of a female cat, there are many similarities. Some are fatty and moist like hair; others are hard to touch at their base, with no fear that if they are touched inappropriately it may cause harm. The technique for treating this area is such that you must use any instrument called "entromissoire," after which the wound heals as follows, depending on what it contains. If it holds moisture, then once drained and dried with cotton soaked in an Egyptian ointment (if available), or alternatively water and salt, and apply this dressing to the wound until the following day; meanwhile, reapply fresh cotton as before, on the second and third days. Then treat the wound with suitable medication until it is healed. If there is a fatty growth in the abscess, strip away its edges according to this method: use your fingers to pull apart all sides of the lesion; then drain any pus, and cleanse thoroughly from every direction, and apply all dressings as you would with hair removal paste (using hot wax). And if the sore is hard like a callous or cyst, follow these instructions I have provided.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the abscesses of pus and moistness are easier because they have less blood; and if any of these abscesses or heads do not have moistness, such as those I mentioned in an old woman's head, where I found an abscess hard like a stone, rough and bloody, that could not be broken; and had someone struck it, they would have made a wound similar to one from a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, whether they come at the heads of children or at the root of ears, keep the opening as high above for days until pus can exit; treat them as is necessary.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck and below the collarbones, and at the edges, and in many shapes; and they never come elsewhere or body parts, and are large; and there are various types of those that contain moisture, and some with malignant tissues do not want to obey health. In which one therefore you see good disposition on touching, and is similar to the skin color of the body, and moves from each side and is not wind pipes of the neck veins or arteries or duct; it's not deep nor pierced; so that you cut off by above, and peel each part, as we have said in chief abscesses on top healed. And if necessary, as we have told head; and neither nerves nor wound nor the veins aneurysmolnail or neck of the wind.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	When you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriol paste or powders that draw blood to the wound, and constrain the wound; let it rest until the abscess is calmed and softened, beginning to decay. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task until completed; then follow your proper course if there are no small scrofulous sores, treat and cleanse them. If there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not open it directly, but tie it with a strong double thread, letting it hang without harming it, then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you open the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join its two edges and hold them together, leaving no excess due to the size of the scrofula. It may be appropriate for you to deal with the root as described, pulling out flesh and cutting as we have said. Scrofulas that hold excess fluid, puncture where there is a hole; then pierce in the same manner as previously mentioned, afterward dress it with ointment and similar substances so that what remains from corruption becomes rotten; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with fragrant oil until healed.
de squinance	When you have to be cleansed with myrrh:    cleaning with aromatic substances so that what remains from afterward  as previously mentioned; then ointment and dress the wound is thoroughly clean it scrofulas, with herbalsam deemed ointment of and cure until healing.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and told of the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinching, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat called "epiglaster" be cleared; and this cannot be done by this method because all veins and the main cause of heat in the patient's mouth, or throat or two almonds are present.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid destruction from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should make the cuts below three or four circles or one small slit across, between two circles or by the quantity of the incision into the throat, not in the trachea.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And if those veins are connected to the cutting of the epiglottis, there is no bleeding, and the vessels are long enough in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, it should be stretched with leather across the entire throat, then cut into the tissue until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid bleeding of vessels, if you see anything else, and then cope (patch) the abscess as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	It is demonstrated by the dislocation of the windpipe which breaks through due to a broken bone in its place and the resulting loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leaves an open wound exposed for some time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time is over with which one doubts the strangling, gather the two lips of the wound at its base, and tie a bandage all around sensing the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce heat until it is safe.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Until the throat is completely cleared of blood and clots, do not perform this procedure; otherwise, the patient may be judged to be near death, with lack of air.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then you must suture the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it and instead breathes through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And so they instructed to leave the wound of the eyelids open until the illness is passed, which takes about three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they ordered to sew the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I shall tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting off part of the windpipe at its beginning.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	one; also, so the s (it with them: pe vount the pai's
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood had come from it; indeed, it was evident that neither vein nor artery served as a passage to the throat, and the windpipe lay open through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and nothing adverse happened except that she turned red in voice, and afterward returned to her normal state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	by the ou soft. But if. The c.
de la grosse gorge	Of a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and they are large abscesses of jet black color, occurring mostly in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and there are two ways: natural and accidental; the former does not have a cause.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	the le te lest:
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And it brings fear, and one must not work on large wounds but only on small ones, and test and examine everything closely.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it similar to our fat, and do not cause any pain, as if caring for ourselves, treat all around its crown, if there are spots.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And examine thoroughly, and heal as necessary, until it is completely well again.
des nous	; �re est: C-C eXe : the bentide ne tre t esstf: they de laugh by a, et ce faire leli sept. If you said e c on the acr leur.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways for us to do this, of which I will tell all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And so I must explain all the differences between our methods and theirs.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the fever and heat are present until they boil over, and it has subsided and completed decay; then rests the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With our man having neither heat nor fever nor pain, and containing a pus-filled swelling which is its own sac and resembles the natural color of the body, it begins to grow like glass.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they have similarities such as softness, or greasiness, or wetness, and their colors are as I described in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to treat ours, that you first examine and inquire about the entire instrument called "entromissor", according to its form or chapter which follows this one.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses in us is to grasp or insert more moisture where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers gently, so that you know the pus has been felt by its core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the interloper, and be careful as it may burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs under the skin, if its color is thus, do so as I have said about other abscesse
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the interruption there is no moisture, assume it's fatty, then rub accordingly with a cross motion and grasp firmly at the edges, carefully scraping off each part, ensuring that the skin remains healthy as you do so.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot treat it healthily, then cut it into pieces to ensure there is nothing left behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	Because if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lingers a bit and the wound aches, apply some poultice of corrosive powders to the wound, bind the wound, and place soothing substances on the abscess, and treat with other remed cures until healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it is severe, cut out both edges of the wound, and treat as that which causes burning pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If it is the opposite or another condition and you hasten to use a poultice of vitriol broth, leave it for two or three days until the wound heals, then let the blood evaporate; afterwards return to the remedy that was previously applied.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	See here the forms of intruding strangulations, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three kinds which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and among them there are again three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are like the needles with which one draws blood, and made of brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow in color are more effective for treating black abscesses of fastoids.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they come in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the width of the puncture.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and in tumors that have two natures with three different types.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And in tumors that have three protuberances, and are of three different types; and in tumors that have two protuberances, with a single protuberance only, and they are of three types; all these must be located therein.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The tip of these that are cut is sharp, and among them there are some that do not cut except in one direction, where they scrape the skin, so the vein or nerve is neither severed nor cut.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And among these dislocations are those replaced in fingers, so that the patient does not perceive it at the onset of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and it is not used anywhere other than in the charnels (body bags), such as legs, arms, bellies, elbows, and similar areas.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	the bones; you that theyt is soie on them tur, notspul�s. Some possible.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And place it once again with certainty to its natural position by connecting veins, and arteries, and then they return according to this great method.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At no time do the nipples of some men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain ugly and swollete, and if they need to be treated, then according to this method of this line B until G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	In the l'ardroit the noun, as they have ne que t le benfit; ous i est
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	When the limb falls onward and is weakened by its size as it often happens in women, they make two cuts above it with similar splits.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	This is to ensure that one is held against the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to line G.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove fatty tissue. And prepare with stitching and powders as we have said before, and all that is necessary for the treatment until it heals cleanly.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not cleaned, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive salve.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it remain until the residue and fat are removed, then cleanse until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses to elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise below the joints are hard scrofulous swellings and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line B up to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the li mordoir les jussoie de les moient li plue biete la tues sois parolez venu en lignes ointes, et yte ou ses c. ici dores, et puis est a qui sont l’oeuvre nul le ligne s comme le ce est pine malaise li de tout les mesme pas l’est, si les mele lues biau la est une.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of a similar nature to warts, treat them as we have said for openings in warts, and if the wound begins to bleed, then apply the fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	From cutting into the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut and the skin is hardened on top, many times abscesses occur, as does the vein becoming swollen and an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	s
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it on your elbangs, there is an intense strain; and if it's from the vein, it has a reasonable absence.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to attempt this abscess; especially when it's from the joints and bones and various other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is necessary to avoid the application of iron, and those who are atop should also avoid it, as well as those with swoln arteries above the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	by. If; C : thtud monge they should and sc.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle above it and pierce to the opposite side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you for extracting the two arteries that are behind the ears.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then mark the spot between the two ties with an instrument until blood flow stops when inserted, and then remove the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then prepare a bandage as instructed by me until the wound heals.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply poultice as needed to this, until it is healthy again.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if there is an abscess from the vein's size, it requires that you apply poultice to your hand as much of the abscess into all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	s and le cat numbers as much (Ct the same example of Mar; it; ça CZele conterple:
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then close the abscess, as I have told you, or join one of the two parts with a suture from one side to the other on the skin;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then pass another needle through all four threads of the suture at the incision made by the first needle, and pull the strands into four loops;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut away the excess from the abscess until it stops oozing, and then cut away the fatty tissue, leaving what is joined.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply poultices of tent and unguents until it is healthy again.
des apostemes des ners	For abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins when injured or from too much labor, so do they occur in nerves for similar reasons.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	with the t, but the and de...
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is firmly held back, the patient feels intense pain, not throughout the body but from below the head.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it moves well in all parts, neither forward nor backward, upwards or downwards. For those with dislocated joints should not be bound by iron as they may experience contractions;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those who are in the head or forehead area develop hardening of the skin at the temples.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	:d. This m butt to-carline paragraph.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, suspend at the incision and eschars, then the bone and join the wound to the stitching, and treat until it is sound.
des grosses boces pendans	Large hanging heads
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never occurs in other parts of the body except for "fungus", as it resembles worms and has subtle roots, and thick stems; there are also small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	by the tuisse; (and i so. And the olds.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I bound and found them at eighteen ounces in one and twenty-five in the other, and with their incision made thusly you should observe if the patient is damp, and the color of the articular tissue is bluish and moist and of fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the wound is wide enough, and be present in your presence, apply the fire cautery. For at the tailor there are often large blood losses, and if the vein gives way, then promptly use a cauterizing agent.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient hopeful yet fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread and bind the articular tissue as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then you restrain it, and continuously strain the thread until it touches the artery, causing significant effort; and if the roots are thick, be wary when inflating fully for the abdomen, but ensure to properly inflate most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize so it does not reoccur; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not inflate the testicle if it is of a sickly color and poor feeling and lacking luster.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an incision for syphilis, and I will come to treat the chancre hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth is filled with fury
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of swelling comes from a wound or incision in the mouth, and is located on the stomach and elsewhere among veins or arteries as it occurs in other cases, or from bleeding from veins or arteries depending on what lies before, or inflammation.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the incision in the mouth and discharge of pus, then the appearance of the boil resembles the natural skin color, and it is easy to come out without pain, with various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an issue with the intestine, then there are various things; and when one presses it on its sides so that it pops back, and then returns, and sometimes it may be swollen, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and from hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is from moisture, that's an easy thing, and opens quickly when you press it with your hand without constraint; and if it's for blood, then by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and it occurs in quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for inflammation, then it's tender to the touch, and the symptoms are such that you observe whether its appearance suggests blood from an artery or vein, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is fitting that you leave the healing alone; for there is doubt and fear as I have told in the chapter on abscesses, by artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestines or bowels, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to soak his string, and let them be stretched straight out, then tie off completely around the fold.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then command him to lie still between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the area where you have fixed it completely, ensuring all is properly set.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Next, extend the dressing over the abscess to cover above the entire large incision.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then wrap it tightly with strong thread or a cord of sturdy silk and make sure the bandage is secure.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	t and that do not f the se que t sire Tardo et to so a c re:z; e canntry by th; they chir pa.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the ligament, dislocate it, and insert the intestine through the exit of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	If you find swelling, drain any pus and remove excess fluid;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	If the artery is twisted or bleeding, quickly return to your work and take two needles, thread them on a cord, and insert the needles around where you previously made an incision, crossing over it.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	First strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and leave it alone until it heals, and expel the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you shall cut when it becomes thin and ripe, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And draw out any blood or pus you find, then treat its wound as needed, and bandage it up.
dou chancre	Of a carbuncle
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	In our division of the resemblances of ulcers, and how one must treat them with medicines, and how to cleanse the wound of iron; and we shall speak of carbuncles that arise in muscles, requiring great caution for treatment, and ancient physicians say that when carbuncles are present or can be removed as those which are located on the thighs, buttocks, and similar areas, they should all be completely removed at their beginning; and when they become large and old, it is not advisebre to approach them, for I have never seen one healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatments that are present or can be removed as we have said, is to purge the patient of black bile once; then make him lean for treatment if he shows signs of repletion, and prepare the patient a good place to perform the operation; then apply ointments or ulcers, and scrape off all hairs and fat from all parts without leaving anything; let blood flow freely, squeeze it well into your hand or any object, and if the bleeding changes direction from the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is closed; then treat with another remedy until healed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division about the resemblances of dropsy; and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each kind, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and what is cured by iron; it only shines. One should not touch with iron on these two kinds: namely, tympanites and hypodipsia, as it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this dropsy resemblance called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment does not help, then look to see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsamo, such as abdomens and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt. And if you see a strong patient with only dropsy, who is neither too young nor too old, you should act thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lay the patient with his back to your hands, and let the assistant press the abdamen'., driving the water down to the lowest part of the thighs, then take a spatula made in this way: It should be sharp at two parts. And always ensure it does not pierce too deeply when you insert it until reaching the intestine; and do not let it bleed.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the jaundice is caused by intestinal issues: if it should be that you make an incision above the elbow, three fingers' breadth from below on the palm; and if the jaundge is due to liver disease, make the incision on the left side of the elbow, three fingers' breadth; and if it is caused by a tumor, make the incision on the right, ensuring that fluids do not flow weakly towards the patient.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the skin with the instrument and empty it, then lift your hand to remove all fat between the skin and vein as if you were scraping a small amount like an onion peel; then pierce the vein until the space reaches eight lengths, which is where the water flows, then cut through this vessel, and insert the instrument of which its form is: It resembles a thin silver chain, made of copper or brass lightweight, with one small hole at the top part, three holes on one side; it tapers like a feather, and the shape of the incision that writers make in the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top of it is the vein, so when the effluents reach the water, proceed with the instrument now; then empty either half or one-third of it, for if you empty too much at that hour, perhaps because the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit and body, where he suffers hand cramps, or comes close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	However, according to the amount of its virtue and what the dispositions of the patient's virtue indicate, as well as his hair; then adjust the instrument and retain water, now held by the key that blocks the duct above the sacrum, which I have explained you should pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering from it, and extract a small quantity of fluid.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do not do this for any day but ensure to avoid emptying until it has moved slightly and only a small amount of fluid remains; if you doubt the patient and leave out much fluid, then resort to the burial remedy or hot sand, along with sweating, baths in sunlight, and drinking wine; as well as using drying medicines until they are healthy again, and cauterizing over the stomach, liver, and spleen after the fluid extraction, just as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the erectile dysfunction
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	At no time are children born without foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or not in its proper place. If necessary, it should soon be pierced with a very fine needle according to this method: then insert a very thin strip of linen and tie it so for three or four days; when he needs to urinate, untie the closure, allowing him to urinate, and then reapply it; however, sometimes there is no need, because the urine that comes out does not keep the closure open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	For those whose foreskin is small, there is a medication with the strip of linen as we have mentioned, it will enlarge. Those who do not have the foreskin in its proper place are afflicted because no child is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until their foreskin retracts; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, which is a very unfortunate illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, and the head of the penis and scrotum are lifted up to the size of a pen'ill, so that the foreskin retracts as needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it does occur, then use the stitching thread to close the wound until healed.
des pustules de la verge	From pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the penis, and it appears as an ugly blemish; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; thus, you should puncture them with a fine needle, drain all pus, then place cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment on top, and cure the wound with this ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess is malignant, of putrid color and full of pus, then you must apply fire cautery. After draining it, if the abscess is within both hairs and skin but outside, remove the one that's inside first; and once removed, treat the outer part. Because when treating them together, they are not certain to prevent piercing of the penis shaft, leading to blackness and decay in its area; it is necessary to address everything that is blackened and corrupted, then place upon a plaster made of honey and flour prepared from acorns and elderberries, then cure with other ointments until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	If blood flow changes, then prepare the lunar cautery in this way: The cautery is prepared with two dispositions together - that is, for the change of blood and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, one must insert or direct a plumb line to the penis so that the patient urinates among it; and when the hairs are dirty at the top of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised, resulting from injury or abscess, then one should scrape with an instrument until the ligaments are released and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if this is a serious matter to discuss it, one must scrape the area with a spatula gently at the top of the penis and hair; then carefully separate between them, and place a fine linen cloth in cold water so that it does not become too dry.
de la circoncision	It pertains to circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a discontinuation of wounds like the others; however, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greater part of masters and saints who practiced circumcision in one day, and with force, and all newborn; it was there keys because there are two locks, and perhaps a cupboard is hung over one and another stays underne.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	When it is recaptured, the pain doubles, and in the softening which is not far from death, the point of the limb is not assured; and sometimes during the softening of the nail, the iron escapes, causing harm to the vessel, and many times this occurs so that there is no need for further treatment.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In the softening which is done with force on all parts of the sinew, I have found the effectiveness of the experiment, as the forces cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, cut equally in all directions with the grain; but ensure that the fibers are properly separated near the skin. And make the first incision so that if a child feels it, he may think you are only tying the thread around his penis as much as necessary, and then allow him to move freely in any manner possible.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then the joint is straightened with your hands throughout, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so that children do not see them or any strain; then place your hand on the penis and blow or squeeze, guiding it up until the shoulder of the penis is aligned; then cleanse well from the filth assembled there; then tie the joint securely with a double thread; then bind below .i. loop to another loop; hold as two loops by the second bound at the pouchet and index finger, keeping between the two loops; carefully lift the foreskin and guide the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then allow the blood to clot gradually, as it is a wound; and place powder on and over the powder with .i. rag glued from half of a cooked egg yolk tempered with pink water, mixed with fine rosemary oil boiled well and fresh, leaving it until the next day, and treating it with another cure until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of cleansing is this: both sides should be held and sharpened, and the edges should be as large as a hazel rod equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mummification is when the core inside flees to the incision; therefore, it must be stretched with your fingernail, so that the core makes an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they transgress for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, leave it until the abscess has subsided, and lightly scorch; cut as you may move, and protect the part of the rod, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the sudden wound of powder, as we have said or written about powders, and if you cut beyond measure, and it goes to the top, it will not harm; treat accordingly, as we have said, until it is sound again.
dou retenement de l’urine	Holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to inflammation of stones, frozen blood, or arrows, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not retained and you see that it is due to a stone or kidney stones near the bladwal, then let the patient be laid on their elbows; put their feet up on the back, and stretch out their belly from above the back, and restrain the sides of the bladder as much as they can. Then you constrain the neck of the bladcu to express the stone on top, which causes urine to flow freely.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	the t c.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	The manner of urine discharge is such that you take a double thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert the head through the string inside the syringe. Trim any excess wool and insert it up to the top of the syringe; then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a seat, and inflate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis up to the base of the penis, then twist the penis towards the foreskin; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladebreak. Allow the patient to feel urination until it's completely emptied, as this is not done in this order due to the direction in which the conduit goes being twisted; then pull out the thread little by little and let urine follow the thread, and extract it.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart with the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied out, and make the patient sit upright.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or rottenness is present, and you see that you must distill waters and medicines, make use of all the instrument called "clampsyr": it has this form.
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side, as you see fit; the upper part through which the medicine will be poured sufficiently to soak the penis without addition, allowing for urine drainage when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the subtle suppository used to cleanse the bladder: it goes thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or horn, and the head is higher; from one breast, the ligaments tear. Then take a sheep bladder and place in it the liquid to be used for cleansing the bladder, then bind together with two strong threads, warming some of the moisture over fire. Then insert the tip of the suppository into the penis, then quickly hold your hand on the bladader as soon as the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, then roundly perforate it; then insert a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle as one assembles a net, and put in there what you wish with oil, moisture, and water, and tie it up using an instrument. And do so as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have previously discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction and accompanying medicines; and we described the difference between stones caused by rain, and all other signs, and where one must work to cut into a stone; and regarding the bladder, and the penis; and I will now tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones formed in the bladebody are more common in children and this is a sign that water leaks from the bladder like a stream of fine water; and there is often blood in urine, and men suffer with their penises, and they experience many spasms; and from such leakage, their foundations weaken; and it's easier for children to heal until they are four years old, but severe in the elderly, and moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is proper first to purify the patient by enema, in order to evacuate all feces from the intestines. For often there may be an obstruction due to stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the arms and make them stand and move slightly backwards, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladpressure; sometimes it emerges from above. Then let the person sit between your hands properly arranged, with their hands below their thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined forward; then grasp and touch within.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in place, hasten to grasp it with your right hand's thumb and index finger dipped in oil. And if it does not come out completely on touching all around, moisten your left index finger with oil; or your middle finger, if the patient is a youth; and grip the foundation of the stone, grasp the stone, and when you feel it at your thumb, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press above your thumb, and push the stone out where you see fit.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and tell him to extend with his right hand the joints upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the joint where the cutting occurs; then he inserts the cauterizing spatula, which gives it its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between the joints and the foundation, not through but to the side of the left thigh; then be straight above the stone, with both legs together or apart at the base, so that the incision is wide below for adequate removal, and inside narrow, depending on the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	be if you and sed de songe too. Hold e t, f:
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Make the celi greater where there are angles and edges; and if it does not move, then you must stretch above using pincers that resemble a file at the top to pull out the stone so it doesn't slip away; or place it under the delicate instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot maneuver it this way, enlarge slightly the opening, and if the stone is protruding, strain with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more stones, first remove the largest from the bladder neck, then cut down, then crush it further, and do the smaller ones afterward if there are any. If they are very large, let them be softer, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: death or urine coming in through the hole where the bladeroids cannot close; but nonetheless strive for traction or grinding with pincers until you crush it into pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And after completing your work, apply incense and aloe oil to the wound along with dragon's blood, strain it, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water over it to cool down the abscess; then restrain the patient on his back until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the joint rises quite well into place with oil and water, then heal with diaphinic unguent and basilic unguent until it is healthy again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if an abscess arises in the wound and ulcers, and blood congeals in the bladder, causing urine retention, which is known to be without heat with the urine: thus insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladeback will corrode, and the peritoneum.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then cleanse the wound of water and herbs and honey, and heal in all ways you can, until it is healthy again; and it is necessary that for all wounds you cure, tie both thighs with a bandage, and apply medicines at the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	If the stone is small and it leads from the groin, firmly lodged inside, and urine cannot pass; for the treatment as I have described before, you must widen the passage many times with this procedure. I have seen such cases thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron stake according to this form and make it at three pointed ends in one piece:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and wrap it around the groin below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladeboard; then insert the stake gently into the groin until it reaches the stone; and turn the stake slowly in your hand within the stone bit by bit, as you are able to pierce through the other side of the stone; urine will come out soon after, then press your hand against what remains lodged in the groin inside the stone. It is immediately broken apart, and it flies away with the urine, and the patient is relieved;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, take one fil from below the wound and another above, then make a rod at the spot between the two bindings, then pull out the binding forcefully, and loosen the ligature, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	From women's wounds
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that the wound is inflicted in women, and if it occurs once, then it is a serious treatment; there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and the second reason is that we cannot find a skilled female who can undress before mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that sometimes it may not be possible to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's side is more dense than the man's stone, so deeper incision must be made, which requires great caution.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to do this procedure, it is necessary that you find a skilled midwife and inform them promptly, and if you cannot find one, seek no other but an experienced wise woman in women's health or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to carry out what you instruct regarding the investigation of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and examine thoroughly if the woman is a virgin: then she should insert her finger or vaginal opening to search for the stone; and if she finds it, she must constrain it from its place, and advise her to insert her finger or that of the sick person's left hand onto the bladder directly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If it is dislocated, one must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the inner knee where it becomes entangled, and feel for the stone in that area; do not move its knee above or below the stone, and let the skin be closed after a small incision.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then insert the needle into the thigh; if you feel the stone, continue to make an incision until the stone can come out freely, and know that stones have many forms: they are small or large, sharp or dull, smooth or rough, long or round, with veins. Understand these forms for knowing their nature.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the stone does not move, apply warm vinegar paste, and keep it on for an hour until it loosens; then return to your work, as long as the stone can be moved, and have the dressings that I told you about in the extraction of stones at home to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the blood does not subside, and it is from an artery that has been severed, then apply powder to the area and compress with bandages and tapes, without restarting this, leave the wound alone unless the patient dies, then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling subsides, return to your procedure until the wound is healed.
de hernie carnouse	For inguinal hernia.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Assembling of water is nothing but moisture or white scum, which is below the root of the veins, contained in the urethra; and it is called "syphilis," and not once properly within the lining of the urethra when one thinks it may be another object; and it is the leather of the vessel between the white syphilis that we have mentioned; and they do not occur without cause.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the origin of this scum is weakness in the vessels, and it spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And many times it comes without coloring: or red, and this is blackish, or it is yellow.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	These are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and foul as we have said, then the abscesses are small, i.e., short like an egg's shape, and do not open up on their own, because they are entirely moisturized.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it is moist in its own fabric, then the abscesses are small with part of a vein, and for this reason one thinks they are another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white flesh, it smells quite well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, you try on all sides of the enclosed area, so as to discern its form from before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intermission, judge by what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure by iron, it is fitting that the patient be made well as much as possible and their body nourished; then they lie on their back under a slightly raised object, with much cloth placed above them.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then they lie on their left side, and command the assistant to sit to their right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart's hinges;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	the t
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the sac clean with water through one large opening and extract all the fluid, and then apply linen bandages, and extend the sac upward; do not touch the heart of the veins, but only the sac itself. Carefully cut or in pieces as needed along its thin edge, so that if you don't cut it skillfully, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the vein springs forth during your work, when you have completed the treatment of the sac, then unite the two sides of the heart with stitches, and heal it as other wounds until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the vein affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie up the vessels that are dilated, suspecting blood discharge; then cut the vein throughout its entirety, and extract the vein, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	Et quand il est assemblé en deux parties ensemble, reconnaissez que ce sont deux branches; coupez l’autre partie de même manière que vous avez fait pour la première, puis évacuez le sang, et mettez dans la plaie un linge mouillé avec huile.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another clean cloth soaked in wine and oil upon it, and put bandages on both sides, and cover with doubled sheets, securing them across the entire binding as per this method.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two sheets and place pieces of rags torn into strips according to this pattern and sew them together at the waistband, with one end reaching from the groin up to the back, and the other towards the base. Take another pair on both hands, and secure all parts together in a loop around the lower garment.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and never is this branch of medicine a fire cautery for cutting iron rods, and you shall take .i. fine caustic pencil, and cut the leather straps, and soak them as we have said, that the white sack containing water may be uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the caustic according to this method and puncture that white sack near the veins, and apply it with hot fine caustic.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And the bandaging in all ways that you can, until everything is covered; and ensure that the fire does not touch the oil; and know that this work is more healing; and take care to prevent bleeding out and injuries from cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	If anything opposes you, or an abscess forms or bleeding occurs or any other thing, then treat the issue that goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to wait for this procedure due to its horribleness, then make a perforation as I have instructed you; and it is when you are well certain by the meanings that we have said earlier that healing occurs.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If the patient sits on his raised seat; then pierce the abscess below all of the surrounding tissue lengthwise, and place the incision along the long body; and make the orifices wide enough that all fluid runs freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the wound, bind it, and allow for healing of any remaining moisture, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the cloth does not allow moisture to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or tool used for treating dropsy as mentioned before; and slightly enlarge the wound so that the moisture returns, coming together after 4-5 months, and once assembled again, thus will pass the patient'angs.
de l’aposteme des coions	For abscesses caused by gonorrhea (presumably a mistranslation of 'des coions', which could mean 'of the lepers' or something similar)
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	In this part of the treatise on dislocations are various postures to be feared by many;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I shall tell you about the workings and appearances of an abscess;
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	And at this matter much oft in order to apply and is herein it comes li pois ence; of the blood and pains that of aillements are often applied on wrye healing, sme semble le pouvre et les meurres pour la mourde que and the plustarments.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by excess of bitter and water-like substance, which spreads to joints or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	The color of the abscess follows the color of the body's core; and there is no pain, and it is a severe abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it may be a fearsome and sharp-piercing abscess, with fox-colored discharge, without any blood or vein swelling coming from us.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is through our artery, it is recognized by the heat of the abscess when pressed with one's hands.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	the good understandt.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	He who is affected by vein inflammation is known by his tendency to react when touched on the joints.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and may often swell up in this manner or other parts of the body.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you must cut out the core of the gallbladnack; then stretch it upwards, extracting the white filament attached to it, and releasing all ligatures around the duct.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	ke la moremplet: in the t d, and so f as. Theophropches byrte le mort.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If it is inflamed in the thigh or within the vessels, one must release all that is held, and wrap roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of a hernia is where it is located behind, one must cut it all out and remove the intestine, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are completed, apply the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	For abscesses of pus
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a lump, with the softening of the tissues.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and it moves abruptly when touched by the patient.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is as fearsome as the one mentioned before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And thus we shall tell you about it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you have the patient sit on a raised seat, then apply the supportive sling around their shoulders and arms.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	Apply it to all parts of the vessel that are close to the rod, and tie up the masters, and stretch them out straight.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut with a sharp scalpel over the entire area of vessels, until they are fully exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	byn::t t (1. I hope line ; if tot the s so croste ben.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle where there is one with a double thread, and attach it at the first place where the vein appeared, and securely fasten to the opposite end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then wrap a bandage tightly straight across, according to the length of the body, targeting the corrupted sores.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with other burns, ensuring that neither of the tendons are damaged.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	by and:
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the bone loses its support due to the incision of vessels, it dries up and cannot heal itself.
de la routure dou syfac	On the treatment of wounds on the skin
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The treatment of this condition involves the incision where there is swelling or extension over the belly in the forearm region, causing the intestines to descend from that wound into one of the sides.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	c. And the bobile; uch; but they I; the  a not so. The same as v.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	When the signs indicate an extension of a spasm or swelling, it occurs gradually over long periods, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it is equal boils up to near the origin, because the sack hastens the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of cutting the sack, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse boils appear from under the skin, due to the exit of the intestines and the body's response to the sack.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time do the windings with the intestines occur and are retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron by fear, it is necessary to flee from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of treating it is to instruct the patient that you guide the intestines back into place with their hand through the wound if possible.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then be sober about their neck between your hands, and lift the buttocks.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then elevate the key above, and cover all the skin of the joints along.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert into the groins of the loin hooks according to what you need to open the wound and they are such that the bones can protrude.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Here come cez les autres eus toques sont they puits then as c ondes are the ose ist beards les cares d’elles sois, est la oui lons tu.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then insert your index finger where it suits the joint, between the white flesh which is below the skin of the elbow and between the second sinew.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and move that which is behind the elbow, and between the second sinew; then flex your right hand into the joint's cavity, extend the white flesh upwards to your left hand, and lift the elbow with all the sinews towards the belly.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the assistant that he extends the elbow upwards, and releases what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if there is any entangled intestine or hard scrofulous swelling at the joints of his two hands, and if you find anything like that, cut it from below towards the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine strands, and cut into the hard swelling at its rear part, which is after the hoof's leather; near the waist, then remove any hairs that appear in lines until you have four strands.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a cross-shape and bind the swelling, which is as we have said after the hoof's leather, with two strong ties from both sides;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	First wrap the heads of the children with two bands so that none of the animals feeding them can enter inside without a boil forming.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place the ligature according to the first band, two fingers in length from it, and after these two bands leave a piece of sacking that is half an inch below the corner of the bone.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then place the other according to the roundness that the eye carries; then cut into the part below the skin of the joints so it does not move freely, and the bow, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then treat with fine linen soaked in oil, and apply to wounds, and there treat the ligament as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And do not cauterize white feces that we have mentioned, after the incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens often, and leave the ligament until it heals by itself; and if it takes too long to heal, then be elevated with warm water, and do as we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	
de hernie carnouse	Of inguinal hernia, a fleshly swelling.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said it is done as if the chapter were like a screw assembled with the eyelet, in such a way that you fasten the threads after the edge slightly above below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	on: the text iciés et it is not w.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	At no time do the stones come loose, as we have said, and open the eyes; and none of the internal organs are torn apart at the joints, and if they are, it is slight, and everything returns within hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in any case, if it remains too long at this point, believes the wound or hernia until the intestines protrude.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this occurs by the extension due to the hernia which is within the stones, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen are the eyes and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment is by cautery as we have previously said; and it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then clip the swollen area of the ulcer as wide as three fist-widths.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the sore which is above the skin that follows it, and take the thread and place it under the visible part of the sore.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the head of the sinew, and do not cover it with a sack nor extend any skin or other thing, as I have shown to you in the treatment of internal intestine inflammation.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then heal it with the treatment for wounds. And when you bandage the wound, if there is swelling and you treat the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sack is constricted, and it has no appearance in the healing process, and the cautery is more effective at this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the joints is softened in certain individuals because the tissues within are moistened, and the sweat is visible; when one wants to treat it, they make the patient lie on their back, and cut the overgrown skin above the natural skin; then join the two edges with a single stitch, and if you see any excess softened skin, do so at three or four firmly placed stitches; next sew between the stitches like other wounds until it is healthy again, and let it heal.
dou chastrement	From hardening of the tissues around the joints
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Dislocations are described in our law and because I prefer not to discuss them in this book, it is only necessary for two reasons: one so that the master responds when asked about dislocation and its treatment, and the other because we often need animal branding to aid us, such as with goats, sheep, deer, and other animals. Thus, I say that treatments are done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method where we perform it through attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until their joints become soft and pliable; then press with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphroditism is a condition involving both male and female reproductive organs.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	The condition where the menstruation of the luex 23. L’ajutoit les sages. En ce est .ijsie. Descoits de la tires à plusur, et li a cuis un ego; et des coi, si poies.
de la tentigene	Of displacement
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Displacement is a protrusion from the natural part, so much that it's unpleasant to look at; and many women consider it as large as an arm, and that is the remedy. It is necessary for you to remove the excess of displacement with your hand or fingers gently; and do not press too deeply, lest bleeding occurs, then treat again until healed; and another protrusion from the mouth of a bone, and its cavity, and perhaps it may leap out forcefully, resembling a cow's udder. Therefore, they called this "the ancient disease kowee". If necessary to remove it as we have said about displacement, and treat until healed.
de erratique	Erratic is the movement of an object or individual that does not follow a fixed or regular course; often unpredictable in behavior or direction.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	If it is erratic because the nature of women's body is not pierced or their earlobs are small; and it is innate by birth, or occurs by disease due to malnutrution when it comes about; or it's caused by a charm, or by subtle syphilis or worms, and originates in the marrow, or ribs, or shoulders, or wherever; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and possibly bearing children; and recognizing this is done through observation of behavior. If the swelling appears imminent, it may be on both ears or behind. If it's subtle syphilis, and it occurs in two spots, seek haste, and follow these steps: place the woman on her back with spread legs; then extend the two fingers fully, until the syphilitic worm is removed, and overlays the swelling; then take flaxen linen soaked in oil, and apply it to the area daily until healed. And if the syphilis is hardened and persistent, one must use a foley catheter resembling a spruce leaf. If the swelling is due to a charm, suspend an onion on a string at the site; then have antiseptic medicines like dragon's blood, incense, abundantly mixed with olive oil; then prepare a wide gauze bandage so that the wound cannot close over; and keep it in place for an extended period, and also apply a linen tent drying method; then treat with other cures until healed. And when charm swelling occurs on the ribs, it must be treated according to this manner, unless it's a hardened abscess. Because at hardened abscesses that occur in the marrow, one should not touch with iron.
des emorroides	For hemorrhoids: One should apply creams or ointments containing ingredients like witch hazel and hydrocortisone to reduce inflamm<|im_sep|>Here is the translation of the text:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Piles are incipient veins which without usual habituation become swollen; and we have previously discussed their kinds, signs, and symptoms, and now I will say those that receive treatment. I state that piles and the lump when they are entirely in the marrow cavity do not appear upon touching, only they can be cured by iron. Those at the mouth of the marrow cavity can be touched, those that can be treated. Therefore it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then extend the swelling with tongs, and apply a bandage near its roots; then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, among other things; then pour its juices into cloth for an hour, then place it in very cold water. If there is bleeding from the area, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark and pomegebo tree peel with gallnuts and similar substances, then take barley flour, confit it with honey and oil, and apply a poultice to her back. And if she is not improved, well; if not, apply blisters on the back and near the armpits without iron; then take linen cloth, and milk or elder juice mixed with old wine, and apply them there. And when the abscess has rested, treat it with ointment until healed; and those called "albathir" are red, and similar to a rough area, so cover as previously described for lumps; then cure until healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Marrubias abscesses
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	. Thes cestiernt isll’s c;flece:sit tzelescaste qure tous
de l’enfantement	During childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The first thing in childbirth is that the midwife must know the figure of natural birth and its signs, and when you see a woman hasten to give birth and desire to smell her: then quickly expect the baby to be born; therefore, if you see these signs, it's necessary to gently press her belly so that the baby is soon born; because as they descend on their head, they come with them, and the feces of superfluities are removed by good mundification; but those who come otherwise do not come naturally. Sometimes they come under their feet, or they come to the body or the neck, and hands that come under her belly, or sovereigns, and can be turned accidentally over her collarbone, in other malicious ways. It is necessary at childbirth that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and avoid errors and deceits; I will show you all the figures as to how one must assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes naturally with its head and the mother gives birth gratefully, and the strength of her is weak, then she should sit on a stool or women hold her; and let the natural ointment of oil or fenugreek be cooked and then apply it to the midwife between his two fingers: this is how you shape (the poultice).
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Et fend la secondine, and cut the sling as long as the moisture that is now coming forward; and press the woman's belly until childbirth descends, and if it does not descend, then you must enema the woman with a mixture of muscatel herbs and fenugreek oil; then let her rest and induce coughing for an hour: now extract the child.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the release of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child is born onto its feet, it must be lifted upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it slightly and slightly more until they are equal;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then prick one of the pieces gently and extend slightly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it does not work as commanded to puncture, then do not blow on its condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it falls out again, if God wills so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not fall as we have said, if turned slightly and slightly, until according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	:
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	And apply to the nature of a woman within, this ointment.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then let her sit in cold water until below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is milky underneath, give her a glass of myrrh, and place it there, leaving it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then the child is made to sit on a chair, then they are induced to sneeze and their mouth and nose are held, and the priest touches their belly gently, as the baby moves now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the dislocation of the child's knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes to this condition, the bailiff places his hands gently and gradually.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	1: that some examples that in English bonle-fusme.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And he bends his hands little by little, and then presses the hands above the belly, and inserts the splints underneath, until it is properly aligned.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump up, then take its legs and move them properly, then move the belly forward, then place his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And you should rock the child little by little; and command the woman to cradle until the child falls asleep.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	that le plus et la dur:
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It requires devising a method to return the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go away;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed with legs bent at the knee;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	iciens, and so itt.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	If it does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then carefully attempt to realign the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And wrap the child according to its natural form, make it sneeze, and command that it cough until it expels what has been ingested forcefully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the child's neck, and let its hands spread apart, and turn its face towards its mother'cuest.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for the barber to wash his hands, then turn them slightly and rub lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when they are even, apply the resinous and oily substance as we have said, then instruct it to move slightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And after you have done this, if the wound sits on a seat, and command that it be pricked; then let the patient sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, give them all a second dose
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this manner for everyone's second dosage, drain the second dosage to your fingertip until all moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child lies on his face with his head raised, then drain from his forehead and neck without holding it back, allowing the child to move freely.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	by e p; TB dont mon cher et m, and they le t ougttor;
adonques si istra legierement.	Then gently reset it accordingly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of joints
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that many times multiple gemelz occur, but never four at once; and this is not a strange occurrence, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	by.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, which when multiplied, are released by their scrotum who seizes them, attached to the bull.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never naturally come out as do all underneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out suddenly, and the care as we have said, then let a skilled physician be involved, who makes it quickly and lightly as needed.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And make as when it may move toward health.
de plusors enfans	And many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	:
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	It is necessary for the barber to know all this, as sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	He should proceed according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of a child dead
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead child or womb as I have described in the section, and she does not bleed, and you are compelled to work by hand.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	until they too that pas;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary for the woman to lie on her back with her chin lowered and legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And you should bind the twins from two parts so that they remain attached to the bed, ensuring not to separate them prematurely during childbirth.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the womb's mouth with oil mixed with almond meal and fenugreek seeds, then apply these oils and meals to her hands.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	d:; s m.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take care if the child is reared so that it descends on its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If there are knots in the ears or neck or mouth or under the palate or from the beard or near the throat or by the sides of the chest.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	Or sois the sides and tiens the l'o oreth on his side a to les peorside on the cheveux est le be it is de l’ou en son diee ou esprend, sus you make an diez he li.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary to tie the sling with his right hand, and place the yoke between his thumbs of the left hand, and he pushes gently with all his hand, inserting the sling in any of those ways we have mentioned, until it reaches its proper position.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of the sling:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then place it against another sling or if you have need for extraction, so that they are equal in length;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then stretch evenly by moving both parts, so they can be moved outward, and have the pegs inserted to hold them in place, as shown here.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains stuck, then grease some of its ends with oil, and push it into that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if none remains stuck, then place this peg or another higher up, and do so until it comes out completely straight.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	les lesi'ssire; est le cta, with the m gramizl on tr. They are so fat L's the  (tides. And then and there.mother their.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If it becomes necessary, wrap around a cloth so that it covers entirely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	, and s�ll. In thise cefort: ca et e the qu'sgration; 20* (t :
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	If the child's head is large and difficult to deliver during birth, or if it has its forehead pressed together.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And when this occurs, you must push the spatula-like spine between your two hands and guide the head out while extracting the mold.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you use an instrument called "almidach," from which the shape comes with tools or charms that follow this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	cannot igne; it s;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	And then treat with tongs the bones to be extracted,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the head springs back and is held with forceps, so that it be split until the dislocations caused by moisture are released.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	Then release, as long as they come li estraie qui les moiture and in a long and even isse en l'iss. Et li poinz à be at which are well and it even the cautere ou quiterousque le pelez saufet on. êtes et puis;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If it is swoln at the belly or below the ribs, one must pierce until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the child is under its feet, then the pull is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the worms is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is strained on the belly or the breast, you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around by hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And if it causes discomfort in the belly or breast, until the swellings within are healed;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if another limb is aching, and the head remains stuck,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If the sailor cuts his hand at the base of the thorn bush, and draws it up to the mouth of the thorn bush.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he applies some lime or two, and bandages it tightly.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	s cue ou;k;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Then it is necessary to administer wet and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And for healing the wounds, one uses clear soothing and moistening ointments.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if a child is on their belly, you can lay them as we have described for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one cannot do so, they may cut it in pieces, leaving nothing of the secondary tissue.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	When you have accomplished this, if there are any abscesses as we have said coming to the bone, then
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, it should be stopped by applying a tight bandage, followed by other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with a child in her womb that had died, then closed up one of the twins and brought out another dead one; this was the other live child.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	s;
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treatment, and for a long time I thought, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	Underneath my strong suction came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I felt very much pain because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	to se a; and lesse ld be on the time, and so as wee de la.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	To treat the wound, and strike hand bones until the woman is at a better stage.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman waited thusly for a long time until it settled back into place slightly.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And are so that du not the stone osse: ne ble s's to be well dextap;t les ondus movement cest fie ise in or; and li boine the wound it bone est, et reu quis: heu que bo :
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the head of the bone to its original position
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of pressure, to which one may refer books; and at two ends there are two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Anyhow, the horns should be more subtle with a restraint, and made from smooth or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let the mouth of the club be two thumbs wide, and the margin of trees one hand's breadth, and long half a palm.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two joints be two hinge placements of the same club, which are firmly fastened in both, half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two hinge placements are fixed to the mouth of the mallet to open when one turns both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in its likeness to pincers, may be crafted from ebony wood or boxwood as per the design of pincers.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two heads and jaws, just as you see, one handspan long, and two thumbs wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see the entire instrument opened wide, make sure the woman sits on a bed with her feet and legs exposed.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then apply the two supports together at the shoulder, holding the head of the instrument between its thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work with your hand on the entire instrument in the same manner as you did with pincers evenly, according to the quantity needed to open the mouth of the shoulder so that it does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all similar but has various appearances; and the more masters you have prepared them, the faster the work will be done, and higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not forget to prepare the instrument which is necessary for its use, as their needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is held during childbirth, it requires that you command the patient to tighten her vagina, and then make her sneeze with a condition, and restrain your hands at her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	of de la bouquette les mains lesme l'est riette les plues d’herent; si tu esplein li la oumant. Li reine mots et on ne quitte the ise, qui que est herde. And it at.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a small pot and make a lid or cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the abscess such as calamondin, rue, anise, chamomile, arnica, and caraway.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs or none of them should be boiled or cooked in water over the fire; then place a rag or cover on one side of the pot, and the other end into the abscess's mouth.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And keep it there until the vapors come out of the abscess; then make it sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second rib dislocates, promptly set it right.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it persists after this treatment and does not improve, the nurse is commanded to have the patient rub their left hand with oil of sage or camphor paste, then wash it off naturally.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and if there is pain in the shoulder again; then gently stretch it gradually, ensuring that the muscles do not contract during extension.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come loose and relocate itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the gallbladeback is strained or extended, we have said the remedy is to induce sneezing and inhaling smoke from herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not respond to all that we have said, then be careful not to attempt the extraction;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	line is in. If you give c said f theta C:
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If you probe it and reset it, it will return forcefully; however, if a bad smell comes from the stomach and head when probing too deeply, it weakens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If necessary, then fragrant smoke baths should be used here: none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with dried sorrel and figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman for retention of locks (pubic hair) is this one:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	by; butto. The final. ánt. The initial; and es the t
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And perform the smoke treatment over the charcoals until it is consumed, then begin again with another.
de percier lou fondement	And of piercing the foundations.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	To c tissung and te charcoif it not s li fudfue de ou les venter of ecrit as and must be healing the donee it's. ould in such that you le fonde, do so l’oilpainte le wound to lourelie avi.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is necessary to bandage him, ensure the gauze pierces at its proper place and not of straw-like texture, and secure the dressing so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a linen cloth in wine and oil, then the healing of unguents until it is cleaned.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not heal, then apply a bandage with boiled linen and let it remain on for days, and remove when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	the t.
de la fistule dou fondement	Of the fistula from the base foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that arise from beneath the base are inflamed and grow as they come near to the foundation below or within a span of two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more; and when the inflammation of that fistula is old, work it, and apply moist pus or subtle bandages.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	the they.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if to the fistulas that perforate up to the bladder, and up to the shaft of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and our side of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus is found a persistent fistula at its base, and not healing.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And you must insert your index finger or base and then thread a fine needle of willow or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	If there is twistedness, and it inserts a subtle plug of wax or a horsehair, so that you feel the plug or hair where it should be;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not sense anything, nor does purgation or winds occur as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Wash them so they are not torn; if you hurry, use a poultice.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches up to the bladder or the urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be treated with remedies.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then pus flows into the abdomen;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	he did so f. That yous, and ougnement the c.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	In these persistent fistulas there is no certain cure other than effort, and the foolish pride of those who intervene in them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are neither persistent nor old, with hope for healing through iron as I have tried.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	: is are not and desu:
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then apply a tent of flax or linen if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain around the base, it is necessary to apply your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	always feel that the tent is pierced; and beware or you sense between your finger the vein or artery, then know that they are present.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	que de unt the in ;
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	On can do everything to properly treat someone, but it happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is provided to them, which is carefully applying the fire cautery according to the size of the fistula as previously described.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the fire burns all over the fistula until it reaches near the base; then do this two or three times as long as you know that the charred parts have been burnt off, which appear like the feathers of a bird.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then treat with bandages soaked in oil until the swelling subsides, then apply ointment to both and bind them together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, that's good. Since this cannot be otherwise healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tendon is affected, and does not pierce to its full length which extends or lies at the base, and between your thumbs and bandage place an thick covering of wax or syrup, and you see the fistula through what covers the area with a color indicating infection.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	the emde: (1 not par benga; irm certaine tre que bon; d.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And it will be freed from the stiffness, and will grow; then mold those crooked joints that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the limb remains weakened, causing tension between you and your work; caution with fire or medicinal poultices.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery gathers two things: that is to say, the hardening of these agitated joints, and the coagulation of blood and prevention of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	s; (1 2 so the s sile as much and there*bon.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with heated resin for a few days, and they are drying medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, it is cleaned and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the base of the foundation, and is pushed away from the body, feel your knee or foot, and check this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	s. çt; 1; That la c, to the quill as t le tat is an; it; The mains (don’s Clavist by anye oculessus they p� igne; but if not followed.
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	When you cauterize it as we have said, or pare to the bone, or if it shows signs of infection, treat accordingly as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too deep, so you do not cut the structure that supports the foundation, and let excretions come through as they will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	first.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then make the defective cartilage which is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then examine to restore the wound, and hold the fistula in the area above the base: if it is a light thing malicious.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And on no occasion are there running sores as follows: and when you strike the tent in the fistula, and it is near the foundation below the leather above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if one takes a pierced tent as follows:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread at the ends, and then he puts the tent throughout the entire thread in the fistula up to the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	treatment. The following?
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And train the head with wire, and bring together both heads as one, and hold them tightly against each other, and leave for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And keep the strain unfastened at no time until the wires cut through the bones that lie between them and break.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not break open, make it punctured in all ways that you know how, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not require for the lancet to be inserted if too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatulum used for making an abscess is very sharp and pointed;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	the t the ben with:
des emorroydes	Of boils
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Boils are in two ways: either they lie deep within the foundation like resin granules, and there are small and large ones, along with pus.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more of them that lie deep within the foundation and near the top of the foundation. However, those that are deeper have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	by a sofck: This:
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them within the foundation requires that you instruct the patient to strain themselves in order to urinate into chambers until their foundations are firm and cracks appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and if it is attached with tongs, or held to your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the nails cannot be held due to their length, then take them with a cloth or thread or a piece of camlet.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract your toes, then wrap them up, and powder with hot ashes that are in place of fire cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you shall cauterize as the chapter on fire cautery says, then treat with other remedebut until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then you should administer an enema with pungent and bitter substances to cleanse what is at the base, allowing it to exit openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When patients touch themselves, and if their hairs are strongly rooted at the foundation, then the cure is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And that you pluck them with your fingernails or pliers, clip the ends, then treat as we have said, until they are clean and he fears a cut by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary to stitch according to this manner: take a twisted thread and thread it onto a needle, then draw the thread from below and pierce the other end of the needle, and turn both ends of the thread around the eye of the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	t.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the foundation a soft cloth soaked in oil or wax, and put it over the area, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it remain until he sweats, and when they are done shedding, treat with ointments or other remedies until he is well again.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	In the same manner as the base layer
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that fistulas occur in the intestines, and due to natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medication does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary for you to reset at the tip of a splinter or under your fingernail with its covering which does not allow for moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal until it becomes solid as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	byt: the t and bon:
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it becomes well again.
dou fremit	The tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A flea is a small creature that appears on the body and moves mostly around.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	At no time does it find relief from cold, and the pain spreads to him just like death by convulsions, affecting his entire body, more in his hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place that quill on the convulsion until it fully covers the area.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to encompass the quill completely around the convulsion and press it firmly, uprooting the convulsion from its source.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a sling of wool or iron according to this form, and be subtle from below and pull gently from above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	as have ase las prises et and moste leu the pointte le plus les conseme tre les points et s'st:
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the suppository
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made is a suppository of silver or brass, or melted lead or wax; and never made are these small and large extracts according to those who have prepared them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they make small suppositories.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the suppository is small or large depending on its width; where the belly is tied following this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	And if there is a displacement or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the head is pierced through; at one side two eye slits, and on the other side one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	c, ceux des est of these lie de, tu;
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And between each pouch there is a need for space, then insert the thread through these pouches, a strong, twisted thread in ten or twelve turns, and form the belly as one would with a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is dense, if it has been pulled forward by a strong thread, then cleanse with an enema; and this is the circular form.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and rub the head with an enema of oil or butter from a goat's udder, or similar substance, then apply it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the physician places his hands together on it until fully warmed, then extract the enema, and elevate the patient's legs near the surface.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the physician wants to remove it, as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night uninterrupted, then greater help is achieved.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer the enema for a bowel complaint, and the physician hastens to remove it, then let him continue until he is well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	m
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the form of the subtle suppository through which the bladder is restrained.
des plaies	Wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	do sockets they com:
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to their sources or where the wounds are made, and for what purpose they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made include piercing of stones, cutting with a sword or knife, or from lances, clubs, arrows, or similar objects.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, thighs, stomach, liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, for memory shall come in its place.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple head wound occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and if you suspect a hot abscess mildly: If the bandage is immediately made on the head mainly if blood comes from the wound, then make the bandage opposite to the affected area.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And instruct the patient to relieve themselves with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not wish to fast, let his meat be reduced, and do not drink wine or dine on flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place a cloth over the wound, if an abscess comes forth, apply a cotton ball soaked in oil only, or in thickened wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	: so and de the in.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it has been moved by the arthritis, apply certain ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	too m
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone, and flat, and holds but barely at all with dressing; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard leather in its place.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat fatty meats, as tested with wheat cooked and eggs, among other things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or suspect gangrene, and it does not reach the bone, then dress it fully, apply moist heat, and treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	If there is an artery in the wound or vein without a covering, and it cannot be tied off with medicine, then find the artery, and if you discover it to be dislocated, secure it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, then burn (cauterize) it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and it is that you put this powder which heals just as well as the salt has moved (dissolved) it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; live coal three parts, and grind finely.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply to the wound, and embed the form, until it heals well and reconnects with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then bind it securely, leaving no slippage if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	; that;
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved, especially while it is healing, do not apply this powder at all.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But apply soaked poultices or wheat flour mixed with water and honey until it cools.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue to treat other wounds as long as they are healing.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	and sucht that s (prima ond do not can be pleust the w and t and they oint ecrit.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound to the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes or in the neck and it is straightforward, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but one finds veins or arteries in the neck being cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	byet:
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the veins is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest body part.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But use the medicine soaked as if washed in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled similarly in gentle water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other bones of my body according to this method, and moistened unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	m il phsi: 1 t
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	When wounds are deep and filled with pus, puncture them or go lower.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arrowhead is stuck and bleeding comes, expose it, remove it, and cauterization may be necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the thorns of the throat are stuck or the cartilage is damaged, and the pathways are guarded, preventing flesh from passing through.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If it enters through the opening of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then immediately straighten it, leaving it for some time, then treat with washed ointments until healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has affected the bone, you should treat it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	te prent en. Ift the mainly he does;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And it has been dislocated and realigned;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder as I have instructed.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	and he of ys: ici ne tu l'a les pest le plage soi les morgue his purgatif to you for it all sontre la mercuryne est of love the same, et cures him de a li, prandres anfist. And I pray tell luys themesquat dure of your l'en, and le jus quid tu, si en son ce ou he with its
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound caused by a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, if you see pus forming in the wound causing the patient great pain: believe then that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	If it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder in the first hour or tie herbs that stop the bleeding from flowing out.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And it returns to the body, causing pain to the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply an attractive balm and bind it two times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have ointment, then place clean wool in the wound to absorb moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	de :
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If it does not come from spasm, nor a harmful shaking of the body or twisting with limbs.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see proper positioning of the bones, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat with tent and other remedies until it is healthy again;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	If it cannot heal or work properly, then understand that there is an abscess; treat as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is straightforward, or worse elsewhere, treat as should be for that which lies before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, bandage with cloths; if small, powdered, and if imbedded in bone with parts of the flesh torn off, treat accordingly for each wound, and remove any embedded fragments.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	f
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, there is the judgment just as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	And rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are large and medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	be lons et:
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	The stitch is more troublesome, and on no occasion does a small wound fare worse than a large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	for it requires that the intestines be reset with force, if they are not done so gradually;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines can swell quickly when they feel cold, thus becoming harder to manipulate.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	the ou Farize man:
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the treatment of the abdomen follows four methods:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The first two common suturing techniques occur in the belly stitching,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the suturing of other wounds on the body and two other specific types of sutures are common for other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	de:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	When a wound is small, and there is no entanglement of any intestine within it.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And to reattach such things, this can be done in one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or due to the small size of the wound, as we have mentioned,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	with it; f, to make theyd’s lesse :e d t, and so:
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	When it is cold, warm it with a certain method:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	And moisten an sponge or a piece of soft cloth in warm water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or boil it in soapy water and cleanse and scrub,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	s de:
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And no time has this done any restriction, and it is allowed to rise up so that it can expand.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling begin to separate, if the intestines are wet or high and ill-cooked.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this it is linked with little substance;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	do not that.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first treatment is to straighten what has been bent,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that none should cut it unless there is great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the tension for breaking:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if wei, then the text de that cane any. 1 none so to it is a way heal ong;
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the bowel has burst forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If you reset according to its natural shape in its proper position,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you can, because it's necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	with:
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raise his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is on the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If you place the head and the tail higher than the lower parts beneath,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And similarly, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	If you agree on what is set in such a way that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus you must treat as I have described for large wounds and small ones.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, apply what has been provided.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then have at your hand an emetic minister who can grasp the entire treatment with his hands.
et assemble les levres;	they say, that healing or more is the Latin: 1.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And this is the common way of suturing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And it is that you choose a needle or more, depending on the size of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the head of the wound two spaces, and insert a needle with strong thick thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two heads of the shoulder with the two ends of a spade; and let them glide gently within, without causing pain or pressure; and when they are well in place, bind tightly to ensure stability.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	Who is removed from the shoulder blade, until you have carefully cut that part off.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	And join together the four ends of the spade joints;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	:: a.
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then promptly join together the two sides of the wound immediately.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And then leave space for one finger, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	Then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	the p, then:
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Until the entire wound is closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and be needles both fine and coarse;
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for fine needles penetrate deeply into the flesh, and too coarse ones cannot enter well;
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	It is necessary for them to be moved back;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to insert needles too far from the joint and into the skin;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	They should not touch or operate on the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	And then wrap the shoulder with splints so they do not bend and disturb the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And place tents or cloths on the shoulder to keep it in place.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let the wound remain until it is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	by d unt;
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	For indeed a needle was inserted there or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second suture is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you join the two heads of skin with an arrowhead or have one strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	:
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the dislocation at the part where you began, as one would sew with threads.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and make space between each stitch the size of a small finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	these stitches hold the flesh together,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	c.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	Who was tormented by a knife.
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and had a wound greater than one palm wide.
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and his intestines were torn to pieces, two palms in width.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	al.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned his intestines as it had been for twenty-four hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and it was the wound closed up until the fifteenth day, and treated, and healed well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where there were no remedies nor any medicines to be found.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And placed a piece of old cloth on the wound twice daily, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Here I will tell you the two proper ways to dress wounds:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	1 in av...
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has felt the edge straight on, then place the head against the sphenoid or near where you inserted the needle.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and cut away from the dense part up to its inner space.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this suture is that you close it as a tanner does with hides,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	c ;[fle
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of suture, which Galien refers to specifically
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is as one might do, who joins the two parts together naturally
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of its edge to the other edge, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	that: il pate the. medieval in a way the is theret; c s.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And let both shoulders lie as they were.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then remove the needle, and pierce it through from the part forward up to inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And let both shoulders lie on as they were.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make a cut in both the forward part up to its core, in two other shoulders that are opposite each other.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And it is the proper manner of stitching and most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien says this word, and no one attests to it.
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	&:
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must push an awl from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And sheets when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If this wound is more serious than others in the belly,
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	theysst asdire
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is so when you find a fresh wound with much blood, just as an arrow has moved it.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If resetting the intestines and edges, then apply powdered incense on it.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the arrow has moved it, then apply any poultice that is available until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	by: on f (or:
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healthy.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	If you lack medicine, apply honey or old cotton as soon as possible when it starts to sway back and forth,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move it two times a day until it is healthy again.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	When you have no need for other medicines in cases where wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt whether the wound has caused communication with the main limbs.
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	If it is necessary that you grind linen lightly in lukewarm oil or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And place it back among the shoulders, and under the elbows;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if they feel pain or swelling at the joints, which often occurs,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	then apply black wine enemas and especially when the swelling reaches as far as the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And it perforates internally, and knows when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine that is called "jün" cannot heal when it is inflamed.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is because of the severity of the wounds that are therein, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and its closeness in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the spleen falls from the wound, reset it as well as the intestines while they are fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is old and has turned gray or black, then you must remove the dead part so that bleeding does not occur.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	s byzus; O’s.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And place the two heads hanging from the part below the wound to ease extraction when the nerves are cut, and the wound bow.
de la routure dou boueil	From the removal of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is loose, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored in some individuals,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I see that a man was tormented or stabbed with a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of his abdomen,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	they that de by:s as the line them.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied care according to what I could, without stopping my subtlety until they were healed and their joints secured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw them joined, I doubted the patient had something wrong in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was nothing amiss, but he remained in better spirits, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	s the patient lesse ons and they c;
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take large forceps, then gather the edges of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when the forceps have pierced the opening, place them on both sides of the edges,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it pulls out its opening again;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	And then wrap the head, holding it so tightly that it cannot dislocate.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then apply another treatment in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed.
et cout la plaie.	And cover the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	first, it's :
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal.
en teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this intestinal thread that is thoroughly cleaned,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	And then bind to the head of this thread a fine twisted flax thread.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then insert the thread into the needle and sew along the intestines, then stitch it in a row.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this manner of stitching from injuries is not contrary to the method of trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	by:
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or if it exists
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Say that any wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and especially when it swells up and bursts open.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	the de:
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And just as when a bird is plucked of its feathers;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And at times clear like a bowstring, and other times thickened;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	And at times sparse, and other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken about wound healing in this section, that any untreated wound has no healing, and there is no scar.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It exists only due to one of these seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This means that it is known as follows - by the smallness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	bone in.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Because there is hardness within it, do not allow any growth of hair on the surface.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Where there is too much bowing.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	When the sinew is torn, and the matter is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	and:
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	When for this reason corruption is a form of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or because in that region there is late digestion and delayed health, and flees by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or where there are wounds or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medical treatments in the section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Thus you must be informed about the treatment of a fistula that is performed by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It's said that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	: and so heal they should be it's.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	Or on the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs.
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	Or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it comes to affecting the main limb's property, and such like.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	by thestre.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is any fistula that does not reach to where I have said, but you trust in the healing.
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you recognize it, then take a tent of linen or iron if the fistula is straight, take it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	When the fistula is twisted, carefully trace a thin line with wax.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the wax bends easily around the twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula is narrow and you cannot well trace it with tentative lines,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	to m:
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	For moisture comes from one pores to another, and is cleansed.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then apply your strength gently, so you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is swoln upwards.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask well of the pain that the patient feels upon pressure from your hand, and its location where it is felt.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you truly know its location, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of those places I have told you, following what I have instructed to do,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and extract the other bone and corrupted cartilages that are within it,
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment until it is healed.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well placed on the right spot, it's necessary to cut into it as much as you see fit.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then place tied bandages with medicinal herbs and tie them up to the top of the faster,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	the so: ictes try.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then he applies soothing unguents with holy oil, until it is well.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	If not healed by this method, then you should cauterize as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And it shall be of the ait is treated with hic, if done; and ours untie et que ne puent par les plaies, puisne quid est parfaire.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves are involved or principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is uncovered and there is decay and blackening, until the king has all the bone decay.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat various extraordinary things until they are healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	but if not healed, and it protrudes again as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	you should know that do not go near water:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	the bone, and if ise.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And remove all decayed bone, then return to its place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is thus sanitary, that's well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if not, say that decay is too prevalent, to which you cannot come.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other remedy but using the splint according to its design.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small deformed bone, and you can pull it out with tongs,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the fracture involves such an instrument (meaning a foreign body),
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there are several bones affected, do not leave any of them untreated.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	but if the moisture acts contrary to this, and it has no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if heat and moisture and cold are present, free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	byt:
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it rest until it is resituated among the bones.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then when [they] will have the bones more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you reset so often the decay until the darkness is all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is significant part of the decayed tissue, reaching close to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a case of a boil on his leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you need an example and assistance in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was once a youth about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came into his body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As long as materials came to the leg, and there was an outbreak of a large abscess, but no need for further opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	However, by their madness, they worked so much on it that the abscess opened.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and consumed a lot of substances, turning into a fistula, and much pus emerged that all exited through the body and moisture.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	;
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	As long as he was called upon, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which it was treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what seemed to be necessary by piercing the skin of great body parts;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and it became red in the young man's body, and had a citrus hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that one part of the leg approached another from all sides.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurried there and cut into it until I uncovered a bone piece,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And found it rotten and smelling, and the decay reached up to the inner part of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to heal the wound with salted medicines for long periods of time, but could not bind.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I began again, and exposed the bone as before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And I found the continuous decay in the bone, and its nerve, and then the vein, and I endeavored to bind it back together.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	However, I could not move it as much as around an inch of bone, and the fracture occurred completely.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then I returned to using medicine; and it healed quickly and securely.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and there was no need to resume the treatment except due to the weakness of the patient, who could not endure,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	it; the next by:
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For evacuating blood often brings distress, but he was entirely cured.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and in the place of the bone arose a hard thorn, which was well-formed and did not cause harm or contrary effects at all, neither on approach nor departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, it should be treated as follows:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	by:s gist. ça he c.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	And command any who he must extend upward;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	And place another strip of linen larger than the first one, and tie it around the bone that is above the wound.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And they are protruding heads, so you pull out the decayed cartilage from underneath.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the cartilage where it is seen to be soft, ensuring that the tissue does not hinder the cartilage.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a peg or a stick below the bone to move the decayed cartilage away;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	by n’t f Tue d sis not line of charger that: cigh they are all; m ;
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	If the bone is corrupted, it does not break open, and the corruption is within or in a part.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If it unveils the whole wound; then place a shard underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	And then bring from one part to the other the corruption, and make it as long as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	When there is a rupture at the joint, repair the damaged joint, and take out the bone on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if there is a rupture in the span of the two joints, unless there is another injury besides coping.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if there is a rupture at the wrist or elbow, that thing is very strong.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	the c (I'the: that doce tot the main; the most aura et more and so far conlemd.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse thoroughly in all ways you can, but do not allow the vein or nerve to hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and be aware that surgical instruments and sutures for repairing these bones are numerous, according to the position of the bones and their appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, their size and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	:
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that your work will show you the instrument of which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and by the testimony of its signs, the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if consider the instrument which you need according to what suits it best.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head swells or due to internal causes, or from excess.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have applied the remedy for that corrosion with curative medicine, but it does not help,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	to be used medicin a medicine and the ws: it is nott ond it should dose but, or. 1 and how they don't heal lyson les huj; the de s:
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If the patient escapes due to death or evil (harm), which is greater, from the injury of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And after the blackening of the limb, then follows the spreading of corruption from member to member.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	And it extends throughout the body; if you hasten with a cup,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is through the impact of any venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, adders, and similar beasts,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the top of the finger joints, and you bind it with a bandage, do not give any space for it to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	if yout:l’sis sonce au est et de te le c (fait.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it occurs on the arm, seek a splint for support; and if it passes through the splint, there is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there are no remedies except in the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And do thus when the scab comes or pus: if it comes to the first joint, then apply after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	, and so please by de the text as fewdroit of lait la is the c lido, and m t that they n’s; Oulbobud st., otherwise:
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it rises up to the leg, strike at the hip joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy than the lancet for the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of dressing with linen or silk cloth on which the limb should be tied above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	:
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments to a wide space so that the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then wrap or sew it, and place on each side a bandage of linen, so that the suture does not touch the healthy flesh;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And bring another wound and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	on ne ski sonce as they e:
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	When you apply certain binding powders; then return to your medication until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I shall tell you that this happened to one man in our time:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	by c rthe the laie aut.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And that erosion first appeared on his thumbs to the inner part of the foot, so much so that it destroyed the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	When a man sees the erosion, he hastens with a copper knife to cut the foot, and is saved.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And for many years after that, the erosion reappeared on his thumbs, and it came upon me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	s. 1 that son: This is as it’sute:
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And I hope to cup his hand, not wishing for any harm, with a desire to restore its matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and also feared that if I cut into his hand, he might die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the virtue of the man was weak; and he became disheartened, returning to his homeland.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And if he has broken his hand, and is healthy again;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I do not include this remedy unless it is necessary for other purposes when needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does an abscess appear in a dry place, and if it lingers so long that it forms a large mass of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	by thet:
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	Et le cuir qui est dessus est aussi subtile que du drap délié,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they shall not reach to the bone nor nerve, and such diseases are called 'healed',
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	also when l'n:kne and so you see.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so extended that it reaches almost to the bone at its origin, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And if the swelling is such that you can cut through all of its skin, especially when it is as fine as a piece of fabric.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and not for fear of decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	If you should le: the unt;  (1 deu:
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is stretched with a linen cloth, thus cleansing with an enema:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look if the breasts are large and the bow that is there has a foul smell.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then the Egyptian medicinal enema prepared in this manner:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ease, mix with oil and litharge equally, and put to cook in a container over fire.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red and thickens as honey does;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of it according to your necessity, and make with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	the first.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract by squeezing out.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until it is properly aligned, and there are no protrusions.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never administer an enema with ash water.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this remedy is not available, take ashes from the wood of a vine and pour water over it,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	at, inm:
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	If the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water will help.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the enema of water and honey with a bit of litharge is given,
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or if the enema of honey and sweet wine is given, as honey has properties to cleanse and wash,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	And the wine makes one feel faint;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done so, and ensure that the wound is properly cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if a cleansing of what causes heat to rise in him;
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And it is that you prick with a pointed object at its extremity, and they do so using oil-soaked rosary beads and in wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you enemas the patient with various medications and unguents, as I have mentioned their properties in treating unguents.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if the wound is too small, and the tube for the enema cannot enter it,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	I the old:
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or basilisk oil, so that it may be spread.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, leave only enough so that either suture or a cleansing enema may enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if a projecting bow is present above it, cover or place it lower than where it lies.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is in its entirety, do not let blood flow freely there.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the chest above as you see fit, then
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	; c s la quo:
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	When the bow is newly made, do not use it for shooting.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover its ends as you wish to see.
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If shaped in such a way that the bow moves easily upward, and leaves nothing of the bow behind;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	as iste ou:
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And they are supported by a large cloth bandage that covers the entire chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then apply your force at the spot beneath the chest, where one portion is slightly wider than the first.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	And then apply when the secondly bandaged section. There are as much and broaden according to that wide, with the skin beadet is wider at than the first:
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And place it on the raised pit of the chest to ease swelling, without removing the large bandage for many days afterwards.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And those who are near the pit of the chest often do so to remove the swelling.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and you should know whether it is due to the swelling: if poison, a small amount or a large one, easily digestible, or difficult to digest.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	And when your treatment has spread in such a manner that you see its nature break through the skin of the chest,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breast is swelling, and approach it gently.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	that he est not so s’ll uter; it; ous que lesstile, then are to let that, and ct; t (bissime the they we should be the. And so:
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If a different bandage is used, renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become irritated and indigestible after many days, assure that they do not swell.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons linger for long periods of time, do not despair over the health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	prt la, and in;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	When bowel indigestion causes it to fall within the chest after many days, know that the breast is not inflamed.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	When the breast is late in healing and becomes protracted, apply dry medicines with a moist base and dry effect.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	If the remedy ends, for there is a large part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	can s c�; but when one.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then he compresses it and uses it; and likewise makes wounds heal faster.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when a poultice of dead man's flesh is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and crush them, and grind into powder with honey when it is on the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	First, apply a strip of cloth, and then stretch it over the chest, without using any ointment or lengthy surgery.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the holy basil, which are like flour and semolina.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in using simple or composite remedebroil it into a powder, and add honey as mentioned earlier, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	the s:nuit antre; t
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Thus you must understand that decay is first, and it pressures on the bone, or on hard limbs, or on ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If treating a fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	For the incising of an abscess on the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarics are abscesses that arise under the nail of the palm.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	If there is stone, or in some cases it exists elsewhere as well.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it becomes ulcerated, if one does not take care of it, an abscess may develop there.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they rub and pour hot oil until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may cover all of it.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the erosion up to the bone, causing pain and an offensive odor, with double-sized shoulders, and a discolored appearance.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	As we have mentioned earlier in the section regarding treatment and it proves beneficial for them.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary to scrape with an iron all the excess flesh remaining from the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The caustic treatment is of great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	ichta; so that do not f cat numbers.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	If it is necessary to place a splint under the nail where the vein lies.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and wrap it upwards, gently and subtly exposing that vein.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply on the remaining part of the wound potent and corroding medications to remove all of it;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and, then lis here:
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	When a tumor is in the bone, cut it away, and treat thoroughly, for as long as the bone corrupts there, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see the joint corrupted, cut into it with a curette as previously mentioned.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape until it is smoothed out.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	the t boso they are prudo ct; The oug a re t (conta ce tulard ou that se the on this.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the nail of the great toe at an angle across.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be sure that the cutting does not reach up to the bone which is below the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, apply something above to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the w asse t m;
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The dislocated shoulder found among some people by chance is completely covered with flesh.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And by chance it may have bone fragments, but never a nail.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of these arise at the root of the joints, or where their birth is in our shoulders.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born with any of our two diseases do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who are born with the disease at the joint, may also move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the stature of one who is plump should be somewhat lighter in manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the, which.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of a joint are particularly difficult to treat: hold them with your cup-handled instrument.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	For those who are born or develop afterward in the same place, it is necessary to first cut around the circumference up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with an appropriate incision, and then treat until it becomes sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	the t. If thra et le;
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to cover the swelling so that it may heal according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or linen cloths soaked in oil of roses, so they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you put between two pieces of fine parchment until the wound is healed, as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	
Des vils	Of evil ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are large wounds covered with excessive moisture and melancholy, coming to many body parts.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk on pilgrimage and work and carry loads, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	which ine. the tand:
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is to cut them and drain the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is that you open the vein and bleed it thoroughly.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting method goes as follows: initially raise the leg with hot water very strongly so that the large veins are thoroughly cleansed.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	bele loin and li c, orlez de t unt (th:le ke peckte;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then wrap the vein at a point, or two points, or three points wide, with a bandage of linen.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then draw and strain the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's body can bear of its virtue.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then remove the sludge, and command that it be soaked in dark meat for purification.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	Theophrop a them: *; if they present; the old by his tre ons.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The emotions of the patient are as follows: raise the affected leg gently if there is much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then place it in a bath, and soak the leg with warm water until it turns red, and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then wrap the veins with long cloth at the top of the calf or in the area below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	and such: you see s 1 the c  m
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or cuts skin, it seems like a bleeding rope.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then pour the edges apart until they separate from the skin, and then bind with a light bandage.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then apply in another place three finger's width above it; then scrape the skin near the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	le ne bon lesle d (e
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then measure another length, or more if you need to, then weigh it out, and cut with the two fingers.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then shape and measure up to the second length; then extract from size to size until it is all full-grown, then cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot shear and raise it, then place a needle through the entire strong, double thread,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	TT lesme o for the ou Lithestus:cuse me: n’s (e on. the length, she:
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep it from slipping out, for if it does slip out, one cannot draw nor lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have drawn it back completely, place a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, and it is not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	s pues: n' 1.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to open the vein is curved, and does not cut or tear, only opens the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of significant curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but since we have said it's large. This is its shape:
De la voinne civile	From civil blood (referring to venous bleeding as opposed to arterial)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	by way and sesle les Marbtul; it's:llkfard.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, as from rot that arises from underneath the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	If it comes into the body as snakes and worms, entering between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	When the signs of this vein's beginning occur, there comes a great inflammeboom to the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then changes occur in the joint, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is exposed, it is necessary to wrap around with a strip of cloth three and a half ells up to four ells. And then,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the cloth hang down from the leg, and every time it is not being used, wrap around with the cloth, and the wound.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	a ex tloro;llt is not so har ELE.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	If you manage to do it, it goes back into its place and causes an abscess and decay there, leading to a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it must be treated little by little until complete, leaving nothing in the body or heart.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And sometimes this vein is not treated when it's done with five or six long palms (measures), or more.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And one man came to me, which extended for ten hand lengths, and when you grasp it, there is a drop or puncture, and pierces all the way to the bottom.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And it becomes completely hollow; and the material inside should be emptied, then fill with healing salves and herbs for a certain period of time, then treat as an abscess would be treated.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And no need to open this vein again, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or heel,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And it often comes from a fall, causing great harm; treat as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From veins that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "ox sickness" because it often occurs in the knees
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, traveling up and down throughout the body.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and he feels extremely well as he moves from limb to limb, so long as it touches skin where he goes, then jumps high.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is prone to decay of various bodily fluids, such as when snakes and worms and roundworms or stomach issues come upon him.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	the nusse t e quadrat; he est la ; thet o; that s as are; and there;  C. The w; no less is an armzard: they c.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	Sometimes it returns on its own, destroying the joint; this often occurs.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and milked, one cannot force when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	It is well done properly with a li bon sies so liges.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cut around it and follow up on the wound, and if the vessel is fully pierced into the vein, and you cannot find it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If fire cautery is used upon it, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it causes is that they burn with oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	n're par terre. Do the same:
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is customary to use remedies of corporeal purification for dissolving maleficent humors through various methods.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if boils arise, treat with inwardly rotten meats.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that arises from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	the physand other and s and:
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And thus, he moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called by an ill woman, and found her with swollen arms, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and shortly after, I saw him rising like a snake up to his shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	Sooner than anything else, just as vital silver when struck from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	they
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never encountered this illness in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Certainly, I believed that others must have experienced the pain moving from one place to another as well.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	however, I had never witnessed it myself, just like in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	a mt.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And therefore appears that constrained swelling;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it does not appear as per this reason in those who are lustful, and have wet bodies and veins replaced;
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see treating this disease, if the patient feels that pain as we have said;
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If gently pushed above and below, then quickly wrapped so that the swelling is held in place.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And cauterize at the site; and if it does not appear visible to your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the treatment of what causes excessive swelling, like foul pills and sycamore bark pills, and similar things.
Des saiettes	t. The line estt;
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrowheads are various, according to their appearances and where they pierce the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, small ones, and bristly ones, and tied.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which flows into any limb without flowing in two ways: or into the principal member.
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as if brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and other members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	; sire in sonce of bone la; he ones.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, for death comes in various forms afterwards.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not entirely embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when the arrow enters and pierces the bone, and causes a swelling over the forehead.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	the pruss and so you. The same:
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And sometimes it is without strength of smell or ears; and occasionally affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And jumping from the wound appears as white hair-like substances, and in leaping just like wet chaff.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And when these signs appear, you must treat the wound, and extract the arrow if it is not yet out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	and the in they, a likerse par le t. If het that the old, but lfors ; f with all the eist not can beste if est m.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And sometimes the patient moves just as hairs do, with black blood in their stool, and comes cold chills and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And thus, they have no doubt that deaths will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	and noir, yet the paist ents. And:
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	When the arrow falls into the area of the lower breastbone, it is near the small ribs; causing great pain and sighing, they move all parts of the shoulder blade.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, perhaps it may be from an open wound where there is undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it does not exit through the intestines, there is no hope for healing or extracting the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	When an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine flows out with a gush, causing the patient great pain; understand that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs - how they are made and the neck, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, buttocks, thighs, and similar parts - are safe according to various arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous - as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow struck him, hitting first at the root of his neck.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and from the other side cut through the fatty tissue behind the ear, but without any result.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And with another arrow struck in the fat of the eye below the eyebrow,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	When the arrow was reset, it could not reach more than the tip towards its shaft.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it was the large arrow from a Turkish bow with one iron tip on each end; the wound healed and no further complications occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And an arrow to his throat was Arabic, and it was the arrow of one earloing ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I sought out Barbarians, and pursued them subtly until I betrayed her; she was saved by the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I betrayed an arrow to his abdomen and thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after it had been there for thirty days, there was no change in his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	ase t. Doie the wt.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you wish to see a man with an arrow wound to his back or belly, and the injury was swiftly treated;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	And remains lodged within it, not disturbing its natural position.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	It causes no hindrance in any of his natural functions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And behold a certain man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, causing a wound that was quickly closed.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and remains in such a state without suffering great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And pierced one of the arrows into a man among the princes near to the king, which entered in his groin.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	And it was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrowhead was fully protruding.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I went to seek treatment after it had been three days. The wound was found to be very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	It seemed as though it were completely healed and I felt no pain.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	thet:
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrowhead
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed above him an appliance that stimulates digestion because his eyes do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appeared to me the point of the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	they:t; c
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	Until he felt the dislocation within his neck for a day; and then I told him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied medicinal ague to the wound until it was healed.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and tested it, feeling that the head of the dislocation had returned to its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then stop at the opening of the wound with that particular medicinal ointment until the head of the shoulder appears clearly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	And it passed well through almost two and a half months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	Then I examined if the wound where I had placed the pincers on both sides could not be removed.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then cease not from subtle and clever methods of traction, until I took one day with well-made tongs.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to how the shape appears at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it and keep the wound closed.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judge that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	; this line; that. In fact;t the f the t.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Then I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows.
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you apply your treatment to that which I do not mention here, for the book cannot fully comprehend it all;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But wise masters know very little about it, and what is before them and failing.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Nine works are done, nine instruments used, in descending to the strange occurrences that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not remain within the members where they are stuck unless according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	is in so.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	The translation of the given Old French lines into English is as follows:
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be left until the flesh is thoroughly healed and the injury fully closed.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And similarly if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let it be left for several days and moved slightly each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	the utrudie with:
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the skull, reaching towards one of the cavities of the brain.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and for any of the incidents I have mentioned earlier to the patient: do not extract it but leave it until it is equal after several days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	because if the arrow reaches near the eye, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not lodged sole cuffs, but only into the bone, reaching near the joint.
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the patient experiences any pain for several days, proceed with suturing.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply lodged and cannot be removed forcefully, then apply a poultice around it as I have instructed; then heal the wound until it becomes clean.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And they dont pas; s (fors l'st assidiant to try de lesby; the empi is not.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then guide it with any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot by the widening of the wound, and by piercing the arrowhead,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein, so infect it until the wound becomes large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	ond they.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If a bone is fixed by two parts so you can move it,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the arrow's shaft as far as possible to extract.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully ensure not to break the arrow, but rather pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	it; and mont that heal not d the f et they prese bon line y or. Doe to you know them:
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if there is a contrary flow of blood causing symptoms, arrange for the treatment as we have described in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and be wary of incision near nerves and veins, and make provisions as you know to draw the arrowhead without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	right away or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form in which the arrow pierced him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	it can not so s; please and le:  (xx as much after that the fofuisse, even c said heal J (b by theq Flower.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	When an arrow comes from elsewhere, or opens any wound, causing the skin to swell noticeably where it is seen or felt.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Thus make a cut there, so that the pincers can take hold, and then extract: if the arrowhead now protrudes.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is caught in the bone, turn your round hand, until it enters the bone and widens it, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	by S.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	If it is from an arrowhead, then remove all of it.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it bleeds, and you see the need to apply pressure, if you use a sharp instrument.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the tip of the arrowhead pierces into the tool; then proceed with caution,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	byt: semble et he.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is grazed, it is necessary to cut all around where the poison is, if you can see.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or lands in the abdomen, groin, bladder, or ribs, and it is near, then cut into it as you see fit.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	the t in f.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pincers used to treat arrow wounds resembles a bird's beak, and so does this one:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow shaft.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	ond s, in a mises:
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	To thrust to the tip of the arrow as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	with tongs to push and pull as described:
des voinnes dou cors communes	in common body openings
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	the d, ce of c.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is to know: two bellows located behind the ears, called 'herbechs'.
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are visible in each temple.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are located on the temples of both eyes, which are called 'aspiracles'.
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	it la pe les so that the same, as atich c’m; tous on:.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two bands which are around his neck.
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are called "augehirch."
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins which lie underneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly bled are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the superficial one, and is on the left side of the ribcage, and they call it "chief's vein" in English.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of both the superficial (chief's vein) and deep (basilic) ones.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	by s
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "wound of the belly," located near the windpipe.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is one of which we can see clearly under the collarbone.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the savior's vein is between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the nape of the left shoulder blade,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "innest", that is in the foot of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins below those mentioned.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	on the w::t  (you: an example by the old prud I don'he t, eceze t.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the quality of the ligament, as I have told you, is to raise the patient's head.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub their level or veins with a coarse cloth; then tighten the collar of the patient with a cord.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until you see two veins appear behind the ears, in two separate places from the top:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	by far son f: I sant n's.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lance, and insert it from below up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and remove the skin and vein well. Make a double incision, and let the blood flow out until you see it stop.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then straighten and hold it, as long as it is aligned properly;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The blockage of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it is an old migraine,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And sunsore, and aching eyes, and weakness in the body with watery tears;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the chiropractor is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient's head must be moved apart, so that both veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel under the elbow joints, then bind securely.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Lift the vein upwards, and cover it with a bandage as you have done in two other veins, and make sure to dress the wound according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then raise the patient's arm, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then put a cotton swab over it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Then apply the plaster and leave it on until cleaned; we have already spoken about their healing and extraction, which is where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	s: I's; If lesche le telle estnt la pe chude; ça se’mient; l’est h’t; So.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient twists their neck until it appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fossor", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and pierce it with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	de so that liump;
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Indeed, it is not necessary for the flames to be too large; and the shaft should be straight, as the bone is close by, and sometimes the flame breaks when it becomes thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The treatise on the two veins that are in the temples helps with the eyes, and with twitching, and with redness, and with trembling of the eyeball, and with face ailments.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their treatment is that the patient turns his neck as if twisted from any ligament, just like before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then treat it, and securely fasten with straps of some length and width, for there is no friction.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then apply enough blood as needed, and afterwards bind with gauze securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The straps of the vein must not be too tight; they should allow room to accommodate swelling and severe conditions such as diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	byzelle de: quires (and ne.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	The quality of health is such that the patient grips his neck, then strains his nose towards your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and takes a thin long thread, weaving it between the two nostr <|endofgeneration|>
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the veins do not open well with this method, and the blood begins to flow at once;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	.n; that a que le t as yous ond've if heal: and o dear.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of a sore throat:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The dryness of the two nostrils assists in the expansion of the pharynx, and at the onset of inflammation, and many diseases, and impetigo, and erosion, and herpes, and sties.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of dryness is that the patient keeps his neck away from both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	que il so fat; s’sile dJJMbofie le t gor se la; thatt; c and de ; the: with a an ou est ond. Tudus they? by is not quite no cetailed. If you in the latter: donorter, but I want to the Haj; it’s tropwed heuze le tat t.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then seal the vein for a while with something long and wide enough, then bleed it promptly as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then repeat on the other vein, and tie off the vessel, gently compressing the veins in between.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strain themselves; leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Here:
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of vein lips above helps with boils in the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits in lips, and toothaches and throat problems.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of this healing is having the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have instructed.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	bytous paragraph;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Thus hold both together, and if you do not recognize them, and are uncertain.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you grasp the larger of each part, and make them from two veins that lie above and below it, as it is all one kind.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the vein under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	if yout the t.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	Et the quality of the gland secretion is such that the patient squeezes between his hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down each cheek for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then cleanse both [cheeks], but do not go too deep inward, as the arteries are downwards.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the cheek which one commonly cleanses are cleaned according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	When taken at all with one large measure of myrtle or subtle oil like sharply cutting knives, and is called "anesil."
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And are wide and fine according to the extent and stretching of veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of myrtle paste is much renowned, and it is broad as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	the.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the form of an olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed, used for treating subtle veins, where there is a fine lemon-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the windpipe, which is one of these subtle veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and neck, and groin, and belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	by nt isnt f.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if you come across an artery, and bleeding begins, then it must be staunched as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it should not be pierced with a flame but heated as is customary.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the bladder does not open clearly, you must extract it and replace it with another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	il’s, et so s that he said lesse que not s the covser; ougue lo se t.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the sling soothes inflammation, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the location of the sinew, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm and touch the area until you feel the muscles.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the origin of the joint, and then bind the limb, and soothe the vein with a sling for inflammation.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	the number of le t ounerotaril and to be; Dexemk: (ou sofait il s, et the bie les que aubole, thetide he en;stost, Et so that n’ve te l’mwisle;
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding upward as a child's urine, and the veins are red and fine, know that it is from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten then, and place your hand upwards for a long time, then remove your hand where the veins are constricted, as often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is on the arm, leave it like this and do not move the patient's limb; and be afraid, and do not move it until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	the re la tholes.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a sliver of pitch pine, and grind it, then take one half and lay it on until the following day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it is not adhering, that's fine; if not, then use the powders that coagulate blood as we have said.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and there are no more than a few positions for the adhesion near the small edge of the wound, and it is possible with the flexibility of the arm joints.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	as t s: Jes;
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	Because it is composed of the pelvic and cranial, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it behooves the surgeon to wash for the nerve that is underneath, and if he punctures too deeply, then he may injure the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it swells and the health suffers greatly, and sometimes it cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve is often opened multiple times, and if it cannot be found in any person due to its subtlety, then you must secure the instrument safely; and avoid injuring the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between two nerves, it causes long pain.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The salve of the head helps to draw blood from the forehead and benefits the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is proper to heal by grasping the cloak of olive or myrtle, for it is the safest of all venues, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one should seek the easier place first and do not press anything during the first time, and start over again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes it causes swelling in some men, but one must not press anything at first.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about wounds, is that a wound is treated solefly to maintain healthy condition.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid coming diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	Et so it be done on one of the three veins which are there named: that is to say, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be done at the beginning of pre-fasting in spring and autumn after eating, when signs of repletion appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it must be done for the first day or third day, after two or three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing prescribed for illnesses has no set time, but when needed it is by day or night, at all hours and always.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it does not require healing for children until fourteen years old or women who are carrying a child during the last quarter of their pregnancy up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should you treat an elderly person over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	c1
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If it has great fever retained, such that the veins do not attract excesses from the intestines which are harmful to the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor does it heal those who consume too much meat or alcohol, regardless of their strength and thirst.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one is afflicted with diarrhea after the pains of colic, vomiting, an upset stomach, frequent intercourse with a woman or manual labor, wakefulness and conjunctions, as well as any other weakening factors, whether by weaponry or injury to the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	; (t; they nei;  1 and: the s. This tet cont m.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then apply a bath if there is no obstruction, to promote blood flow.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and cleanse the vein near the wound with a third bandage as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and avoid work, pain, extravagance, and similar things on that day;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	by the le par lesse:
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then stretch out the ligaments moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot be corrected without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then heat the area with hands until the veins swell, and they become hot to touch.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then moisten the sinew with a bit of old oil, and place your finger from your left hand on the vein just above the head area for as long as you wish to strengthen it.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	That the vein does not open at being struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that escape like ropes from the juggler, and some of which are flat due to thinness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if when placed upon the flame, it retreats into the flame and cannot open the vein, thus they are such.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	as de le couits to ond; and:  c.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, try again for a while from that place where you worked hastily, unless the lump has swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the lump is swoln, and the patient becomes hopeful, let him rest for a day or two, and do not tie his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps he will come to abscesses soon; do not enter the bath, then resume the medicine if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	If the perforation is small or if there is subtle bleeding and you doubt that it does not release as much blood as you see, apply pressure directly to the same hole.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And tend the wound slightly tautly so that the flesh swells; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the flesh swelling, do not continue to cleanse it, and put a little oil on it, as it eases pain in that area, and is an effective substitute for lime at this location.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus manage with oil each wound you cleanse by cleansing the veins to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And it is done with triacle and bowels as well, when placed over the wound; so subtle are the veins that they burst if too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes an abscess often, particularly when it has not been healed and the opening of the vein is small at that time.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	the.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue of the vein, and if it remains at its place for some days without any blackness or greenish color, then it does not harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, apply some of the juice of aloe or myrrh mixed with wormwood, ointment, or similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often occurs an abscess and appearance of the sore on the bladder: so place your hand over it, and if you find the area soft to pressure with your hand, then that is the bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then accordingly do not place anything on any of the things we have said, for perhaps in the court without touching an artery; but make a dry plaster with .i. substance to harden the area, then heal it with another remedy until it is sound.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see that it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too warm, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for those who are flat and extended, and need blood extraction, to make them wider wounds, with wide veins.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and make them bandage lightly but frequently, and it should be bandaged by cutting across rather than pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this way of bandaging is safe from blood flow and nerve pinching, and it is better for the bandage to be long or wide than narrow.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	the tretes. Thene ne se mainsich. Butt this. And if a
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is of cold complexion, mix the medicine with bread soaked in syrup mixed with honey-based syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if the palm is affected by the disease after bloodletting, it is necessary that he inhales a blend of gum and fragrant, subtle syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and apply other things as we have mentioned in the treatise on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he wishes to unbind the arm and suspend it another time if needed, when weakened by great fatigue, so that it is loosely done according to the amount of its continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wishes to unbind the arm after the first suspension and is strong-bodied, then it should be loosened for six hours after the first suspension or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wishes to suspend another limb, then he must do so on the second day or later.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	When there is much blood within the body that has been scorched, and it causes fever; therefore one must draw a large quantity of milk-like fluid, and dilate the veins until they flow freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you should address all aspects of health and place your hand over the pulse when it beats, to prevent death from occurring in that area.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this often occurs when healers are neglectful,
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary when you see a dislocated arm, to make blood flow the second time and the wound be closed, but rather apply pressure firmly on top.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is bent, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it heal the second time; or at the tip of the flame, until the blood that has clotted in the vein flows again.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	man's c, but by t;  (their. If;
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if bleeding is needed a second time, cleanse the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins within the arm are cleansed in the area of the main vein because it is composed (of them).
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	They M. The word se p s and so: some to the next theta time by Magb a deux t lest-you's, and d. This is not f (hte la m.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind it securely so the vein appears well, then suture now across, not wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the puncture be large, and stitch well near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it, then place the hand in hot water, allowing the blood to flow into the water until there is enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it's swollen, do not place the hand in hot water again, as one places it more often in winter than summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	; and en kumboltaille the f; t fas by l's;
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The condition of the salvatelle of the right hand is applicable to all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Straighten the hand, and put it in hot water until the veins are expelled, if you can see them.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the condition is twisted, and if you bind it all around completely, do not cause harm to anything else;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then put the hand in warm water if it is frozen in the wound, and cannot be removed from there.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and honey to it for rapid healing, and do this with each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve of the eye in the left hand is effective against the disease of scabies, and do as I have told you with the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	they c: it’s: The line:mfe ETD e t (in themdiz not cetoreard and so; if na ben ça et f.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As with diseases of the muscles, paralysis of fingers, and illness of nerves, and old ailments of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the nature of his health is such that the patient will vomit up clots in hot water, and rub on the vein until it clears.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and lie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from there flow many nerves.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Clean the wound or enlarge it further, whether at the joint or ankle, ensuring movement is possible.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cleanse it at the foot, beware of any nerves that are exposed, and dress the wound as when bandaging a limb; let the padding be evenly placed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if no blood can escape, put the foot in water and ensure thorough draining of the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	cannot ce emt.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and similarly treat the other arm equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The lameness of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and its swelling causes pain in the hip when it's hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its swelling is such that the patient goes to or from the bath and stretches it out 4 fingers above the ankle while twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then the blood flows in all ways that you can see, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and must be moved so you catch it, for the vein is loose, and it has risen greatly towards the hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not catch it, let any part of the vein that is opened or torn flow out through its end or side, and towards the small finger, and protect against numbness.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	sue Ca (h:
Des sainies de ventouse	Of suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, glass, or ivory; and suction is done in two ways: by piercing to draw blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And the suction method that does not involve piercing is done in two ways: either at full heat, or without heating.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	p they dose que the and then that'kid, and that he cum iews4-e les:
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Of which one is all atop the head, while the other is amidst the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And two more on both sides of the neck; and the vein from under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the hernia of the two shoulders; and the hernia on the crura.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the hernias between the two arms; and the hernias in the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the hernias of the two ankles; and the ventosation does not treat blood loss, but for small veins scattered in the flesh.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	: s.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it is not necessary for it to be cushioned or warmed with fire or any warmth, in any illness that arises from overrepletion, until all the body has been emptied of fluids.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if it is necessary for illnesses to be drained, or by habit, let us drain each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every other day.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they have need to be drained, also suffer headaches.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and head, and neck, and darkness in the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and bleeding.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are those who think and see through numbed blood and agonies and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order to ventose after three and a half hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sainted of the mouse helps with greatness of the head ... that comes to them, and it is not necessary for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	This windwounding is located at the site of the head's injury.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution or scurvy, as it causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And it should not be used by those with weak eyesight or cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who suffer often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to apply the poultice slightly lower due to suspicion of dislocation.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The wind-washing inside the neck is in line with the inflammation of the head and the spleen, and thus it serves to lengthen the affected area.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to incision of the throat channel, and all other matters, including enlargement.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	cas marckie as m
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Ventilation of the two ribs near the neck causes pain in the head, otitis and migraines, strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the sanctuary of the basilica; and you must instruct the nurse to express his hand in placement, so he does not cut the artery or bleed excessively.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation from below the chin causes mouth disease, and decay of gums, and various diseases that are in the mouth; it is in the sanctueby the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The swelling of the shoulders is an illness that comes from heat and filling up.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The swelling of the joints is as if it were three wounds on the arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	For it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply, as the tissue is close to veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and conditions below them, so it must be large, made of linen, and need to be well wrung; and sometimes if they are too thin, they may break; causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The buboes of the legs drain blood readily, for they attract blood from all over the body, and are worth their weight in old-time headaches, and of kidneys, and bladder issues, and relieve spasms; and they lie at two sophistries, and two ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, and bring about paralysis in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the bubo is that you first put it in an empty place and do so promptly, and set it quickly, and move equally, and do not cease doing so until you see the redness and swelling, and appear with a dull blood; then tighten, and remove the ventouses, and take care of the condition of the body, for there are some who have scabies and clear pores: it is sufficient to prick once only, and make large shallow cuts.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the bubo is large, you should prick twice: the first time to facilitate the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the bone is severely damaged, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood at a time, we should only do so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish to draw out much blood, let us begin often; and if the bone is severely damaged, strike it deeply at first, ensuring that the joints are swiftly pierced.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is appropriate for those with thick and hard skin, who have these characteristics, to apply the eyes of absorbent oil that are invigoraturative.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is this way, with oil of violets or almond softening, or squash seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is healed, with watercress oil, or of lilies, or chamomile, or similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of frankincense, or balm of galangal, or aniseed oil, and other like substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if you treat those with tender and wide chairs, there is no need to put oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash after the ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or blackthorn water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should get up easily, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses should get up with old wine, or water of suckling, or an extract of anise or chamomile, or other similar substances.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	Et il ne faut pas qu'on soulève avec un garrot avant ou après le bain ni pendant le bain, mais une heure ou deux après le bain; et ne dort pas après la compression.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Et il convient qu'on l'arrose quand on doit souligner et quand il a été soulevé.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	Et garde-toi de celui qui a le foie colérique, et dont la peau est trop grasse et inflammée ;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it is necessary to apply cold things, such as ripe pomegranates and endives and lettuce at ease, and similar items.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and mashed pulse, and quail blood, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold constitution should apply honey syrup and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, with small portions of mashed pulse, along with mashed legumes and small birds and wildfowl.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	nusckt to f: (so fatir KZRchfat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is proper to give certain individuals either triacle or muscat wine before or after, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And be careful in administering it; however, only those who are hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cupping that is done without injury are those placed on the liver and kidneys, and gout, and abdomen and headache and rheumatism and hip, for that limb cannot be struck there.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	line; (prie marx tocarontir C' bye la formmanis.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	If as we place on the eyes when they are healthy; to remove the hardness that is in the limb, as we apply bladders on the belly and on the thighs to reduce the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And remove pain when there is swelling or stones, if extract by its attracting power perhaps the swelling, and displace the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And so do it when placed upon the liver and groin where there is retained windiness,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these blisters are arranged with empty cups to drain as needed; and sometimes they are filled with fire, and at other times with plain water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And if it is like pneumonia, and in such a manner that you fill the blister with hot water or water to which herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the blister treatment using fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should have two pieces of width and half the length of a palm at its front, and around the millieu there must be one small hole, just as to insert a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should have an opening, soft in front so that it does not harm the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and within the middle there must be a crossbeam of linen or iron to hold in place a candle holder.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	r progress. M:
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	Car the pustules of children are not like those old, and lean as fatty ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should this pustule be placed upon the limb thusly?
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	And take the candle of wax or a salve and place it within the pustule across the shaft which is within the pustule.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	If the whiteness is at the bottom of the bladder, so it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then place it upon the limb, and your thumb should be under the palm as we have mentioned, so that when you want to do so, a vapor arises and you open the bladder.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And wrap it with the lining as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	the final.
et c’est li forme:	And here is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without exception, they are placed only in limbs where one cannot apply cupping due to their small size, such as lips and gums.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on the naked areas of flesh, like bumps or nipples, and similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	be c coms gist:
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And they place her on an inclined soft bed, until she is accustomed to it, and has no discomfort in the belly.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then provide veins and a poultice, then rub the limb until it is reddened, and apply bandages.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are filled and have healed, if you can place them near where the poultice is, then do so, as it is very beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the limb with ease, then thoroughly moisten it, very well, then squeeze.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the limb is too much after being moved from its normal position, soak it in cold water with a linen cloth, and apply until the swelling subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple areas of swelling, apply crushed vitriol or gall nuts and similar substances until it subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	(un gue los tudroit lines
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more remedies, then take other substances.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the medicines do not work, rub the site of fresh blood with a needle until they take effect.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then apply them there, and as soon as you feel the blood, let it rest;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	they are so e t s f.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and involve the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the wise physicians are versed in this treatise of mine, which they have never seen in any old books or letters read.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	bytum:
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing, but through the knowledge of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have mastered their teachings, and by experience, and from the habits of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described here in this chapter what is contained within it, and shortened at the end, and clearly shown the forms of treatments that are applied, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say or prologue of this book contains the essence of words and chapters in which the wise man places his understanding, and remains on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	When fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur in any part, it is necessary to support the injured person on both sides if nothing totally supports them, as with a weak body, children, or elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	And if the pain is not too severe or very cold; and mix warm foods such as cold broth, meat of birds and rabbits, and do not drink wine nor consume any fatty dishes, nor fill oneself with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot abscess or discharge of matter from the limb; then the patient returns to his previous state as he has been accustomed.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with meats that cause nourishment or thickness like cooked wheat in water, and rice, lamb testicles, liver, bacon, eggs, fresh fish, large wine, and such things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	To partial dislocation, there appear movements and sooner fractures occur.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that old and brittle bones cannot be well reunited or fused according to their nature for limb support, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not forget to reset the broken bone with a large bandage that is strong and joins the member together, until it becomes as sturdy as before; and let him not discontinue his efforts entirely, and for this he must nourish himself with hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	le f s.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that go to breaking, others by splintering, as the sharpening of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that's just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	the n’t
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known that bone fractures occur because the joint is twisted and opened widely on one side, and located near the wrist of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twist or touching together, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can well have a twist, or tear, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	s noce t2; (C:
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fractures which go into tilt, and are the two parts disconnected, they must now be set evenly, just as abscesses also arise.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses occur, leave it for no day until the abscess is soothed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it as evenly as you can easily and gently, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than those with missing parts; then strain it if necessary thereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	the n's
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset them by all means at their original positions as best you can, and ensure through your work there is no injury or pain for the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And properly join the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems not rightly: then dress it neatly and do not bind or press too tightly as those who often cause abscesses and member constriction through their work; we have seen this many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	When the limb is at a standstard position, properly instruct the patient not to move it, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	And when it feels no pain except at one spot, make sure to position the limb so that it feels no pain at all.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And ensure it is put back properly, so twistedness does not occur when restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken member depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Aches that the broken limbs are of various kinds, small and large, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	Because there are small members such as bones and veins: wrap with soft and fine linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	oun and the sere so que la mort est avir, come les gens they pries.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the joint is slightly loosened, three turns or four according to the limb, and grip the hand a bit throughout the ligament, then go above the break and strain less, so the break then move it slightly apart.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament a little bit at a time until you grasp a large part of it in its original position, then take another ligament, and turn around correctly on the broken spot.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the part below the break and strain moderately, not too hard or too weakly, as we have said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the intertwined threads of linen or cloth until it is all equal, then bind securely above an armband, and then place well-made supports underneath, if there are no abscesses or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or swelling, then apply something soothing to the abscess warmly and remove the swelling, leaving it thus for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then secure your supports and they should be of a moderate width about the size of a hand's breadth or wood for making splints, or palm fronds, following this pattern:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, it is necessary for the staff inserted through the break to be a bit larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and as long as required by the size of the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tie up with sutures in the same way as you did on the first occasion, and bandage quickly using a thread, just like in the initial setting of the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	When wider it is, then lesser it becomes; and it must be that the thread be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the thread is too thick, as I have observed in the works of peasants who twist their flax strings into cords for mending, it is a great mistake, because the string cannot be uniform if it is too fine, and it must not have less than two spaces between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the nails after straightening them into healthy ones, then apply linen patches or rag cloth underneamoors, so that they do not loosen.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not matter to extract all fragments from fractured limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it does not matter to insert splints that after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the likelihood of a hot swelling occurring.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	by far le fle lo une;
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of making a plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take pine resin and yarrow and onion, an ounce; myrrh and aloes, two ounces; alum seven ounces; and make it into powder, adding honey with egg whites. If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones, effective for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster effective for twists: take mugat and wormwood an cu. Mirri and aloes iiij cu. Acacia vi cu. Balsamic amber x cu., grind well, mix with water or egg whites, apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another plaster for joints and bones coming out of their place, which eases pain felt, and cleans the wound: take fresh lamb's suet, milliard meal and boiled oil, and apply on it. This plaster does not restore but is good to soothe burns from a hot abscess, and properly relieves pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for setting broken bones: take dry leaves of fig trees and ground ivy, and grind them together to make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for plastering to heal broken bones and reduce swelling from an abscess: take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, barley flour in equal parts; grind them together, mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, apply it with moist coriander water or plain water.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another more effective method for plastering to heal members with a hard abscess: take the root of valerian, flax seeds, alkanet, mallow seeds, and wormwood; violet flowers and chamomile in equal parts; grind them together and mix with salt water or freshwater or wine, depending on the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb to restore its strength, but only wax mixed with oil, and nothing else; he states it should be neither too hard nor too soft between two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen believes one should apply dry and slightly warm substances to a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, olive oil, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method for treating wounds and pain: take mugwort and henbane leaves, or bird feathers, and yarrow; grind them equally, and pound into a paste to apply as a poultice.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then gently relocate them shortly afterward, and be cautious that the patient feels no pain or has moved any bones from their place; if they do not dislocate again on their own.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	If pain, itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling comes, hurry and relocate them again, and apply the splint now; take a light cloth, dampen with seawater, soak in clear water, lift up the limb until the itch subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then bind it with dry linen, softened in clear water or rose oil, and lay under a quilt until you are certain there is no fever.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And rest the inflammation of the limb, and if it is bone causing pain, then begin to reset subtly again, with a little bit of plaster, and do not strain so hard as before; and continue delicately until it is normal.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and warmth and pain and swelling indicate bone involvement throughout, and you need plaster and bandages to do so again as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing comes to the limb as we have mentioned, do not dislocate it except after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for more than 20 days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals, and bring the joint back into alignment.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then you must reset it more securely than before, and the swelling will subside as I have said earlier; and if you see that the place is drying out too much, know that infections cannot come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	arises it must from hot water baths, every time you loosen it, and this should be done daily, and apply a little ointment.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	in this treatment, thus prevent the formation of sores on the limb, and hasten what are done by the false healers who return the limb improperly: that is wrong and harmful, and I see nothing else but pain and doing the work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and the causes are distinctive;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Connatured est lesoil be done by the sest of les ossoz à toutes le mieux. ici sont des iste lesmaucaus, car ite de l’est peur et li charpte qui que tu may beque and that are made as d’os en telles tu est ceste ouste, done so est tout du par sgrat;
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing it, this manner of "absolute" fracture occurs; and there is a wound from these two great or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impacted break, or fracture, or stone chip, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a hanging fracture, which reaches up to the tissue just below the bone, or it is above the bnose and is this wound great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has been sutured into the bone as subtly as with threaded needles, and it is a small tear, thus this breakage is called "hairline."
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made or caused by being pierced with an arrow, falling, or similar occurrence, and results in a piece of bone entering inside, it behaves as bellows do when inflated upon themselves; thus between the arrows within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more often with those who have moist skulls, like children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it occurs in all these ways of breaking where small parts are displaced, as they should be; and I will speak about them here.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of fractures through dislocation above them, and examination with probing fingers, and by the corrupt cartilage found thereupon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is known when the bone has been uncovered, and rubbed black above it if there is an open fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	by the them (S cijd. So much and, t so far a m
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	When you do not see an unstable fracture or expect healing, begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the pain comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day of the moon that you can see, remove the bone in front.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is so situated, hurry to remove the bone within seven days, as long as the tissue underneath the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone fracture reaches the tissue covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and ensure that you grasp the injured head with a wound, and expose above the bone in all ways that you can, and on the surface of the wound as gently as possible.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if bleeding progresses to reveal the bone or abscess, use what is appropriate for this purpose, and ensure that you fill the cavity with wool soaked in oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and blood flow is certain; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of operation: one method is that you cut at the narrow opening ahead, and this is its shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various cuts of different widths - some narrow and others wide, sharp at one end and flat at another, made of iron wire; and work gently so as not to nick the skull.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is out of place and hardened, it must be that you pierce around it, thus fitting in splints with tongs, not too far so they don't penetrate beyond the outer bone; there should be a margin or circle above the tip, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; thus you will have several, each coming into its place on the edge of the bone, with tongs for all tests. And this is the form of the three ways of tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place one tongs on the beam, and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tongs a little bit afterward, doing this all around, then measure with incisors the space of the bone between the punctures, making it as finely as possible, lightly, as we have said, to trace out the bone with your hand or any of the instruments you have like pincers; and be sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and traced it out, so that you remove the readiness which is close to the bone from all other instruments similar to an incision tool, but it must be more sharp and finer than the others.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	If it lingers any small bones or scales, then lightly press with fingers to the strains; then treat the wound of stitches and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is this which the Greeks call it, and it is more beneficial; and he holds it very strongly, and that's my opinion.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose part of the bone, at which the fracture opens up; and when you have exposed that part, then place on top of the head of this crescent-shaped instrument, of which here is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut too deeply on one side, and it is an agitated part in two sides, so that the cutting faces towards the bone; then gently strike with a small mallet from below, ensuring you lightly tap all around the bone without injuring the skin.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is loose to the bone and gently strike the bone lightly, for one could cause harm or fear if struck too hard.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate through to the skin and is cut only from above, with small fragments remaining; then address the roughness afterward, and use a subtle file to remove scales at each location, using various quantities for optimal treatment based on the work and nature of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter large boils, then proceed with more subtle ones, and continue until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In the case of any fine hair cutting and delicate fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its specific nature; this is not easily restored in those who have devoted themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sore is uncovered, it is necessary to take a piece of flax linen cloth according to the amount of the wound, and apply oil-soaked cotton on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another bandage folded in double or triple layers, and moisten it with vinegar and oil, rose-scented. Place it on the first bandage, then do this more gently than possible so as not to burden the patient's face, afterwards treat above by using another ligature, and do not tighten it until only the wound itself is covered.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it as such for a day or two until the swelling of the abscess has calmed, then release it, and administer herbs like lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, etc. Make a dust from these things, apply to the ward, and add medicines without causing numbing;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound remains clean, do not allow any ointment or bandage to be left on it, as when hair grows beneath a brain cloth, they can stick and cause great harm; because when something irritating is placed upon the face, it causes discomfort above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Thus take heed, if by any chance something happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness comes as a result of the medicine applied, that it has power, then one must take part of honey and three parts rose oil and mix them with a cloth, and apply it to the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follow the methods of care that are appropriate until he is healthy again.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	; a.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you insert your little finger or thimble into the nose, and align the break within your index finger, and in the nostril as far back as possible, until the fracture returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, so that the patient does not feel pain during your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is on the part above the nose and the thumb cannot be placed at its place, you should slightly enlarge the head of a saw to make room for it.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, do similarly, and hurry to restore it by the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or similar day, when the abscesses are soothed, then bind to the neck with tent-cloths of flaxen cloth if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And in similar semblable, ou tres-so est isnt les de. Sime the untie, ith: li cauter que en l'artempe thee of bone est desor, ce tissiez d’elles le se, la cousts and soi ores le chis.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some restorers say that they must grease the threads with butter and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be done by making a mixture of egg yolk and powdered mill, then leave the thread until the bone has set and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use goose feathers in place of threads, and if there is an eggshell fragment nearby, and it causes a breakage, then bring relief to the patient by blowing away. Do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes while working on the patient, put some greased wool or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little bit of diacron.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	If abscesses do not come out, apply poultice with preference using wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place it on lightly soaked swabs, without tying the bandages tight.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	If the bone break is small and broken into tiny pieces, remove any fragments that are suitable for extraction, then cut the fissure, treat with care in accordance with poultices and salves appropriate to this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no bone fracture in the limb, treat with straps and apply splints until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the displacement of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound, the fracture is slight, as it does not involve bones breaking apart easily, if one can feel gaps internally.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right part, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand, gently feel inside the fracture, and guide it with the other hand carefully, enscribing them.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	After 96. Why they:
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If the dislocations of the teeth occur, or jarring, then they are strained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put on a fractured mandible cerote, and place over it a double cloth; then place a large well-made stone under the cloth according to the size of the mandible, and measure as much movement that you can allow, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, relocate it by the next day, and then put back what is changing; place a poultice on top, with finely ground flour or wheat bran powder after you have removed the cerote; place a light linen over the poultcuie, and if the poultuce swells, ensure the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come up, treat as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no piece of bone has been extracted; carefully extract the fragment from the surrounding tissues with this instrument.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it using a flap according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces of bone, and it does not remain in place, if the wound is wide, then apply on top .i. splints with straps to immobilize it, until it heals properly.
de la forcele	the; O's.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The powerful breaks many times before the shoulder, and the breakage occurs in three ways: where it is broken and separated into two, and also has pieces, and is easier to restore; or there is a break with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when there is a break with an accompanying wound, so that you have two assistants; one washes the dislocated shoulder where the powerful break occurred; and the other extends the neck toward the affected part; then place the break evenly on both hands, ensuring proper alignment without any bulging or jutting.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if further extension is needed, place under the shoulder of the patient a round rod made of cloth or linen and thick according to your necessity; stretch and lift the powerful break, holding the rod with one hand, ensuring proper alignment as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you cannot draw the head of the dislocation to its proper place because it comes from far away, then have the patient lie on their stomach and insert half an ounce earring under the shoulder blade, pushing the ministers down the back until the bone of the dislocated joint is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then approach the fracture with your hands, and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut into them. Carefully remove the pieces of bone, and if they cannot be joined by any means, use one of the instruments you have prepared; but place this instrument under the dislocation for safety.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And it should resemble a spoon and not be pointed, and have the same width as necessary for the size of the bone and strength of your hand. It must have two handles, just like you see, with one being wider and the other narrower, according to the shape of the wound that occurred when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the abscess's heat, if it is a small wound, or if you doubt the pus amount, apply the dressing and bandages accordingly to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when abscesses come out, if pus is present, apply linen soaked in rose oil and alcohol and wine, and put on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The extraction of bones when the wound is not too large and does not taper, place pounded powder mixed with fresh egg yolk on the bone, and put fine gauze over it, and place a sponge underneath the splint if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, then place a double cloth over the stoppage and the splint; then take a subtle pin of three fingers' breadth long and wide, wrap it around that band so that the head of the band is hanging.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the pin over the breakage, and turn the band around the neck, and beneath both shoulders, one good and one bad. Tie each side securely, and when you see that the fracture is held firmly in place, and it's clear to you that the pin does not move above the broken bone, then check on them every day; if the ligatures loosen, retighten them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And lay the patient with his bad shoulder on his back, and place a small pillow underneath the shoulder when he sleeps to lift it upwards; this will ease the pain in the fracture by supporting the shoulder properly, so you tie the arm to the neck, making sure that nothing untoward happens.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then begin the splint again if it is necessary, and restrain and leave it so, until restored; it is usually restored in no more than twenty-eight days, or sooner for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Regarding a shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes it occurs that the shoulder is fractured or widened and cannot be moved at all, and one should not touch it; then set it according to the shape of the breakage, and bandage it in a natural way in any manner you can; then put powder made from milled wheat with plenty of egg whites, and light gauze; then place over the shoulder an oval patch slightly wider than the fracture, without leaving gaps on the shoulder, and cover that area with linen strips so that the patch cuts evenly; and then secure it tightly with a large bandage so that the patch does not move from its place, and check the suture every day; and each time there is pain, reinforce the dressing, and adjust the oval if it becomes loose, and elevate the limb of the patient. The shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes without breaking the skin, treat it gently, as we have discussed in our section on easing abscesses with heat.
de la brisure dou pis	Of healing broken legs.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The thigh is rarely broken in the middle part, but it often breaks towards the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it descends downwards, and causes the patient great pain, weakness, numbness, heat, and sometimes vomits blood, with exposed bone ends at the fracture site, which feel quite badly.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is to have the patient lie on their back, placing a pillow between the shoulders, then pressing the shoulder blades and bringing together the ribs with both hands, carefully ensuring all limbs are positioned equally as necessary until the bone structure appears correctly; next apply splints and padding over the fracture subtly using salt or another light substance, wrapping it in a cloth so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its round shape on the back, stretching gently and releasing every hour as it heals, and continue if it becomes more relaxed; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or itchiness at the site, pain, or pus, do so quickly, then apply a remedy using various methods of care; afterward, reset the splint and keep it stretched until healthy.
de la brisure des costes	For rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	For if the incisions are often found on the back, and it is severe painful to remove them, and they must be inspected closely like that there may not heal; for infection should be examined carefully by physicians of wounds or other such cases when sus lissoie de la pus.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the reductions are such that you align the fracture properly, as it should be. Then place a splint, and if needed, secure with a stake.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is descending into the interior, causing great pain and numbness to the patient as with pleurisy, for the bone lacks flesh; it has many nicks, and brings up much blood vomitus, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have applied significant remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And from those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to push the fracture forward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not advise creating wounds when there are pus-filled abscesses present unless they have already occurred.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have occurred, then treat them accordingly.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that applying cups on the body to draw out humors is reasonable, although there is doubt that these cups may attract excess fluids due to weakness in the body's positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	as many not so that the following them: ichoont read f (and they are all; a certaineckse contley line.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured due to the bone not holding up, causing doubt in the patient, then one must cut near the broken rib location; and it is necessary to use an instrument for protection against a syphilic condition; then one should cut the bone, gently draw out fragments, and then sew the two edges of the wound if large, and treat with emollient plasters until healed. And if pus arises, put moistened rags in oil rose pattern on it, and place over the location; while tending to the lining where it should be for pus, let it rest loosely against the rib cage or where it should be, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of a broken rib
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a fractured bone of the ribcage, and it is possible that it may bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	When this happens to anyone and you wish to know if they will be well or not, take heed if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and lifeless, unable to move or extend them, and when pricked with a needle, do not feel anything. Know that it is fatal in some dispositions; but if they can move and feel well when strained without pain, know that the bone joint is safe, and the patient will be healed if given care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things occur in the spine of the back, and you wish to know if they will be well or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and if there is swelling on either side of the back that hinders movement; and when lifted over his belly, defecation occurs without willingness. And when it has been pressed under its stomach and wants to rise, cannot do so. Know that it is fatal: do not exert yourself in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this incident does not occur, then the matter is more lightweight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply if there is an abscess heat, then put oil of roses or olive oil on the spine until it is soothed; then place it under one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it must be set under the head; then remove the bone, and join the two edges of the wound with a stitch, if they are large, until healed; and if the bone's head is broken, known as "the skull fracture," put your pouch in your left hand, and balance it equal to your right hand, then place the plaster and bandage on top, if needed; then bind it, and if there are any dislocated bones, mend them, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For a broken hipbone fracture, apply treatment to stabilize the area; use splints or plasters for support if necessary, and provide pain relief using appropriate methods as per medical knowledge of that time.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there's not a slight reduction at its head; and they make long cuts, sloping to the sole, coming in pain at the place, and swelling as though broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And for the restoration, extend your hand over it until you are above the break; and determine which bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, make it even with that break so it can be in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or slopes to the sole, make the patient lie on their belly until the restoration of that break is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have set it evenly, place under the plaster, then place on a wooden or metal pillar and strain the breakage so that it does not move; and wrap with linen from below the ribs until it is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided; and then follow what we have previously mentioned; and afterward proceed with restoration, and strain as necessary, unless there is any complication; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are those which lie between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, then one must be repaired according to one of the two ways; that is, take a piece of plain wood as an splint, in this manner.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulders with two ligaments, and place the patient under one of them; then pour blood over the broken bone on the splint until it reaches halfway, and have a crook made from wood, then rest it under any heavy object or extenders provided by attendants; then set the fracture equally between his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	the t; and the cont that b
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the extraction is more forceful, restrain a bandage from below the break and along it, and extend each part of the limb. And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade's head, one must place a bandage in the middle under the elbow, and another towards the wrist, beneath the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the wrist, it requires gently applying a lighter pressure without strain until the break is equal on both sides, and along the forearm. Then adjust the alignment correctly as needed, and secure it, unless abscesses develop thereafter.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses occur, do not restrain them for more than six days and apply a cloth with ease and oil roseate until the abscess is soothed; then secure it, and the manner of securing should be such that you place an embossment over the break, then bring the arm close to the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; wrap it up and restrain above the joint as well as the arm until it is steadily aligned, unless anything prevents this or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use restraints and place a larger and stronger than others, and each pinçaints of which are iii degrees of space entre parts; then secure it so on top, as many espleure .i. Then above the break is more less than aligne de, and after chapter so that ii of which of them up inchement auaint dement, and of chapiste, plus forment to be of:
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you see the setting of fractures and straining, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and doubt if the wound is hot, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check each four days that swelling or infection does not come to the site because it may become too tight. If so, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	If no such incidents occur, do not release the binding until after four or more days, and have the patient sleep on their back with hands placed over their stomach; and put an evenly plain cloth of wool under the shoulder, and check every hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or become soft in the ties; if it is restored by the virtue of medicine, then give him the food as we have mentioned before, ensuring the meat is first. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be completely recovered in forty days altogether; and then one should release them and administer a bath and medicines with oil ointments at the site to straighten it. If the straining is unpleasant and bent, delay releeing until after one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	For a broken arm fracture:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "ulna" and the "radius," with one being small, which supports the forearm; and the other large, located below it towards the elbow joint; sometimes just the large ulna or radius is broken, or both together at times.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bone (radius) is broken, its repair and healing are easy; but when the large bone (ulna) is broken, its treatment is poorer, and more difficult than if both were broken together. If only the small bone is fractured, it should be gently extended and aligned properly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large bone (ulna), then one must pull more forcefully; extend it with support underneath, and elevate the forearm higher than the other side, while keeping the small arm lower, cross bandages over it at the same level, so that the patient does not endure any pain. Then extend the supporting brace of the arm towards the area below their hand or to a sling, with another support on the opposite side. And then place splints correctly according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, place each one back to its proper position; and if any are dislocated that prick at their corners, do not restore them to their original location, but elevate and bind with a splint as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a break accompanied by a wound, I advise the surgeon to take care of it individually.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if during the beginning of healing pus arises from all wounds, make .i. bandage using a cloth of resin oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or soft; and wrap it up subtly until the wound is calmed. Then remove the dressing, and place the splint with plenty of powdered eggshells, as you do for other fractures; and make sure that this splint must be stronger and wider than the others: there should be at least six or more splints arranged depending on whether the break is in one bone or two. Pull it tighter near the fracture than anywhere else, and every day move it less as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and ensure that bandages above the fracture are not too hard or rough. Use linen thread for binding, neither too thick nor thin, as we've previously stated. And after a few days, attend to the limb and ligaments again.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	If any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon a member, you must soak the limb in warm water until the itch is eased; and let the limb not rest tightly. Then resume straining, and if the bindings are softened and the bone exposed, proceed with treatment likewise.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a little and let it rest for some days until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If none of these things we have said occur to the patient, do not loosen until xx days have passed or sooner; then place his hands on his neck, and make sure they are evenly spaced, and beware of movement and displacement, let him sleep on his back; know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or xxxv., and by chance in xx. days, according to the compositions and the constitutions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It is said that at the back of the hand where the tendons are, fractures occur frequently and not just bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged in front of him equally; then place his hand on a stretched table, and extend the ministers' bones that are broken, and align them evenly until they are well joined; and apply plaster and stuffing, unless abscesses occur, then he puts a splint according to the quantity thereof; and it should be wrapped in .i. cloth of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is near the forehead within the plant of the abdomen, make a splint from linen cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their broken rib; then strain with a long strip of cloth, ensuring its height is as tall as the palm's length, and continue to apply pressure as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the lower part (possibly referring to the jaw), it must be that you place a splint above and below it on either side so the hand remains open and straight, then wrap entirely around the hand, ensuring the ligament between them is securely held.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of your fingers (possibly referring to a finger), if it's a sprain, position them equally as needed; and strain with the palm, and if you see that putting on a small straight splint helps elevate the injury without movement. If the fracture occurs at other joints like the index or another one of the fingers, place them equally, and bind with the healthy finger that is afterward; or bind all together in such way as to allow some movement, or you may put on a splint if needed (possibly referring to padding), as I have instructed. Be mindful in the care for healing wounds and preparing for abscess drainage, and treat any bleeding that occurs as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see when it twists forward and backward; and its restoration consists in tying a ligature above the fracture and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb equally with its corresponding side; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	When the fracture is near the root of the thigh, let one ligament be towards the wrist, and the other beneath the fracture. Similarly if it is close to the knee, then make the ligature next to the knee, and provide extension above; then place the mire (splint) on the bone equally with both hands until it conforms to its natural shape, and then apply a bandage, ensuring no abscesses form.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess present, allow it to be soothed and then return to your work and treatment; the lithotomy is done in part fashion.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	Wrap around the fracture a bandage of durable cloth doubled into two or three layers; leave excess material hanging down, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches to the root of the thigh and sew a long thread from the hip to the leg, just below the knee, let the head of the thread hang above it; then turn up the leg and wrap with bandages around the thigh, placing one pin at the fracture site. Then place another pin on the leg bone; then weave in between the leg and thigh using soft cloth to ensure equal tension, then begin three or four times at the fracture site; as you approach the fracture more it doesn't move from its location; then return to the two threads that you have woven through the leg and thigh, and place three pins above it.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it occurs and is dislocated as described many times before, if there are pieces of bone that protrude, one should pull them out if possible; and if not, the opening must be cut, and a hook used to extract them; then treat as we have said until healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	On occasion the thigh is broken as in a shoulder or arm; however, when such restoration is done, it does not deceive the sickly person.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Be aware that the thigh may be restored in one day or less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove under the knee cap
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	He says that in the groove under the knee cap there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's not much more than a tear or piercing, and leads to all kinds of wounds, feeling painful and generally bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that you put what was torn back to its place so it can move freely; then apply the cast, and if needed, use a round splint, and strain as necessary, followed by all the arrangements we have mentioned for other types of breaks such as abscesses and similar issues; then address each accident with whatever is appropriate until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	les journef:
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the treatments are all alike.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns from every part.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen; then turn it back over. Then perform an extension, make it even, and bind the fragments equally; however, if the fracture appears unsightly, with several pieces present, let the extension be minor and lighter; proceed accordingly depending on your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your treatment, take two strips of stiffened wood measuring the length of the leg from one end to the other and wrap them once around above and below, securing in the middle as well, so that the leg may not bend to the right or left, thus it is good; and none administer a long bandage if made of wood, positioning the leg forward to restrict movement, properly applied at the fracture site where there is an injury; each day move the leg to check for bleeding or other incidents, cure until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Regarding a broken bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bones of the foot it comes to a fracture and the small bones, and nothing occurs that causes dislocation or other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture at the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding on top of each groove, place your feet where the bones are elevated, then press until they return to their original position; then apply an embalmment and dressings over it, and put a small padded bandage with two flat buttons underneath, then bind it firmly for support, after which you have enveloped with cloths around.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the ligament, for you will find the bones equal again, either broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any broken bones, then repair them as we have said for the hand of a man; then put a splint on the broken bone according to its length and width, then place a table under it as I mentioned earlier, and stretch it immediately; and if there are two or three or more, break each one with a splint according to its size, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and strapped beneath the foot of the table so that they hang below the belly.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is important not to forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each injury as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit upright and lean to the back part, then held from behind; next fill the vagina with cotton and insert it as large as one finger; have her stand up, then lift the buttocks slightly and gradually, until the cotton comes into the entrance of the nature, restoring the bone along with the tampon; when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinaturit, let it return, thus doing this for seven days or so: the break will be healed, and if you wish, take a pouch of sheep bladder, tie a rag at its mouth, then fill the entire pouch with nature; blow into the rag until the air fills the bladder inside. The nature will return to its place; next fill it with cotton and leave as such for several days until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the arm or hand is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said with the hip; and these close fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and effort, and read my book. For the break signifies various conditions for restoration: therefore understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	And so the les apres de l’entement, soit la brissoie les arriere prenemonts est quide qui ie la porte aulees que li maintes. Quant le reste les. Enfors entor, et ce quittre doree oinment puis ne i les. And soi:
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those who have a fracture with a wound, particularly if the bone of the hip or shoulder resembles one, they should be made whole again; and let the ligaments that we mentioned testify to their healing.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, then begin healing from lead poisoning at that same hour or day, unless there are other issues; proceed to restore the fracture in the meantam hour or day, if there's no abscess present.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	the most of that you noe:t; it a: nd: sockets; do not said c and they what ICE d.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the knee, it must be gently aligned with your hands in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension cannot be made to align with your hands, then use this instrument of iron which is .viij. or .vij. long inches, and its width according to the amount of wound; and it is necessary for the barber that he grasps .iii. or iiij., as needed in each bone-setting procedure; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not fold when compressing the limb during your operation, with a wider part forward:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And they are called "pallins" so that the barber must place it under the visible part of the head; and it should be evenly aligned on both sides. And if the fracture is subtle, and the tension cannot properly grasp the bone, then you cut off the top of the bune until the tension can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, use the cap of an appropriate instrument for this purpose, either incising or sawing; then remove whatever is lodged within the sharply pointed and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back together and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it's not in its natural place. Adjust until it is correctly positioned, then moisten a black sticky woolen cloth properly soaked; do not apply any ointment or other substances to the wound which may cause decay; after restoring the bone and leaving the wound exposed, cover the entire area according to the size of the wound, taking care that it is not strained with the fracture; many times this has been done by wise men and led to healing or death once. The tension should be gentler and softer than with other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is severe or large and you suspect that an accidental infection may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, do not apply any dressing; but wrap firmly around it with hard cloth bandages. And when after one day or two days, a sore appears on the wound, remove whatever you applied over everything, and put healing ointment for wounds as an antiseptic ointer tetrafarmacist type and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary to equip the limb with a splint so that the bowel moves lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if more than one day passes, and it cannot be made loose again but continues to dislocate like this because there are small bone fragments, so you must dress the wound with gauze, and remove all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	the ben; I S; (s s
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises that come from the ulceration
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the ulceration, especially when it is near the joint, and an unsightly thing is to see the deformation of the limb; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Be careful then if the bone is still fresh: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, frankincense, and other similar things, and select none or all of these, and mix them with astringent wine, abundant oil or olive juice; and place it in slices, and press well without loosening daily, then remove and start anew on another piece until the swelling subsides; or bind over a suitably made plank; for its property is that it draws out all excess fluids from the limbs; and if the swelling has turned as hard as stone and needs to be removed, cover with bandages, reduce the surplus flesh; then take it to a barber until it is dried.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and remains weak and delicate afterward due to various causes: one because it was bound too tightly and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many bindings that prevented normal movement in the limb; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of large movements, not within its time; or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to have the patient eat well and keep their body limber until there are multiple veins in them; and administer baths, bringing joy and comfort; then apply plaster to the member so that it draws significant nourishment into it, and often wash with warm water until nourishment returns to the member; and let it return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After illness, the limb becomes distorted
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	After illness, the limb becomes twisted again after healing, and bones are severely broken, and the form of the limb is ugly; however, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that a completely new member must be created, and many foolish men have done so in our land; such practices are blameworthy, leading to great harm, and sometimes death. However, if the dislocations and twists are recent, it is fitting to treat them with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked, like valerian leaves, roots, poppy seeds, and similar things; and a one-week poultice, such as well-made diaquilon, and take the musk root of valerian, and mix it with geese fat or oil of sesame, and apply the poultice. Or take fig gums, and grind them with fennel seed, and similar medicines that alleviate stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And never is the dislocated bone moved by continuous and lengthy rubbing with wet hands. Instead, movements are to be applied to each limb hourly.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted and hardened vein is like a stone, it must be removed with a knife, as far down to the bone as needed, using a delicate sharp blade; then apply poultice and pay attention to its treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This book begins with dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, now it is necessary to return carefully without force.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because if you delay, the limb may swell, and perhaps when resetting it is difficult to put back in place; therefore, one must not move it at the time of swelling: many times this causes bruising and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Also, when this happens, bandage the patient's limb, then let it rest until the inflammaturess is calmed; then bathe the member with warm water and oil, then gently move each part as it heals in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	by ous la*
des mandibules	Of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones become dislocated and remain out of place; there are two ways in which this occurs: either they have moved slightly from their position and softened a bit, or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, causing saliva to escape from the mouth that it cannot contain, preventing them from closing their mouths, and wrapping their tongues with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is minor, it may return to various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	by:
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	The minister should dye the patient's hair, and insert a small mirror from one of its hands into the root of the dislocation at the angle of the jaw within the mouth; if the dislocation is in two parts; the other hand must be free to keep it even; and instruct the patient to soften their mandibles, and move them completely.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The minister places the mirror so that it is level, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the return is difficult, especially when both mandibles are together, use warm water and oil to gently move them; do not force the movement as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	When they are returned evenly, and the wound in the patient's body heals well and softens sensation, then place a cloth of moistened linen made with rose oil and wax on it, and lightly bind it with fine strips.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two cushions, so that they do not move left or right nor strain themselves but eat light foods until pains are gone, and jaws are anointed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then serve what they want to eat lightly, and do not strain themselves in opening the mouth for eating or drinking, until jaws are well anointed and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two lower jaws cannot be returned to their place within an hour and are not properly aligned again, fever and usual colds may occur, and possibly gastrointestinal discharge, or possibly pure bile is vomited.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then declare that it is a fatal condition; and many times death occurs within seven days for those affected by it.
de la forcelle	From the spleen
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot be dislocated within the ribs without also affecting it and its neighbor, and it is never dislocated by chance, as one feels well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then firmly press the dislocation with your palm, and it will return; then place a splint underneath and secure it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if not possible, and if it dislocates occasionally, secure it in its place as we have said; then place a splint underneprise of them. It should include:
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	It is the head and the second part is anguet.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and on many occasions, it dislocates underneath towards the hip joint, particularly in those with little flesh, as they move quickly; in those with sufficient flesh, it moves easily, and returns easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes this happens to certain men with knocks or fractures, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, believing it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must examine it thoroughly until certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known when dislocation occurs towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity evident.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, just below the shoulder blade as if it were an eye socket; and the patient cannot move his hand towards its side or make any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed because you can clearly observe it at the joint.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this method of dislocation is not just to reset it when new or if the child is unwell.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then places his fingers below the elbow and lifts the joint with force to its proper place; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, placing it back underneath so swiftly it will return.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said after some days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and softened and soothingly rubbed with an ointment, like an infusion of elder and fenugreek and flaxseed in water, and thus treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then let the patient lie on their back, and place a strip of linen under the elbow that is neither too soft nor too hard, then put the physician's thumb under the heel of the foot and lift the shoulder gently, and draw the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And other ministers wash the patient's head downward so it cannot move backward; that shoulder returns at once, and if you see, reset according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And that you make present a person taller than the patient; and they stand facing the side of the bed, lift the shoulder from under the sickle of the patient's head, raise the shoulder upwards so that the patient hangs in their arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other ministers pull the patient's hand downward toward their belly. And if the shoulder is too lightweight, attach it with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the limb is also reset in another manner: and it is such that you insert a long stick into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is aligned similarly to a stake, and neither too large nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is taken away from the patient, but wrapped with soft cloths underneath, and the limb should be long and firm; then extend its hand on the opposite side formally, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return despite all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take two sticks from two arms of great length and four inches wide, which are bent to enter straight under the saddle, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the forearm wrapped in cloth so it does not hurt the patient, then place under the seat of the affected person; extend out arms above the length of the limb, and tie the shoulder to the forearm, with the arm at the head end, then move the arm onto a wide stool's slat, let hands fall backward, leaving the body hanging on one side: now hold the joint in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in any manner, if you must place under the seat a woolen spindle of equal length, then apply the instrument with powdered substance from the mill, including incense and egg's ash, on all around the shoulder, then strain immediately off the seat, turning the joint over the instrument, and wrap the hand at its collar, keeping hands in place like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he fasts so long as the limb is comforted, for then it will cure faster; and after 5 or 6 days thereafter, move it; and if it becomes firm and does not soften, then it is well-healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the dislocation is severe due to moisture that has occurred, or for another reason, it is necessary to provide three punctures as shown in the treatise on fire cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it remains dislocated after six days, and the joint does not hold or can lift either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the back and hips is caused by impact, and extension of hands, and you provide another remedy; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and delays in movement, it is often used by the patient many times until those stiffnesses are alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the elbow joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	One should say that the elbow joint is dislocated at two ends and returns to both; if it's completely dislocated in all parts, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not repositioned because one can see it well and feel it; and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	When you join the dislocated arm with the sound one, if it appears clearly bent. For the joining is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is necessary to reset it as soon as abscesses arise, for if they come about, it would be difficult to reset them; and at times not all can be reset fully, especially when they are in the rear; these are worse than other dislocations, cause more pain, and possibly result in death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	The restoration is such that when it can be reset, extend its hand to your two hands; and spread the arms wide, and the fingers according to the cautery around, above, and below, and position the joints together or at the base of the palm until they return to their place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	When the dislocation is at the front, it returns as it folds its hand onto itself, with the root of the palm's keel that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return on its own, give strong extension; and have two ministers extend the arm, holding each end of a long wide cloth. Then turn the arm from both sides, after wrapping them with the cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the minister joins the joint to its hand, if anointed with any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	When it is back in place, put on the arm with dry olive oil and firmly stretch it, bend the arm at the elbow of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly in place, release the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, reapply the olive oil and the bandage, leaving it for some days until it is securely fixed; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	If he feels weakness after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub it well until it is soothed; or put on the joint a fat sheep's wool bandage, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and let him take another bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	When it subsides, if you rub the joint promptly, then reset and apply a bandage above, and then immerse in baths; do so twice or thrice until it is sound; if you see swelling, place warm cow dung mixed with butter on it and strain; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint dislocates and the return is light compared to other joints; it must be hastily returned to its place at the same hour as it dislocates, so that it swells or becomes hot like a boil.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the repositioning is such that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend their fingers, and align it evenly so that they put their palm over the joint area, pressing until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly in place; then position the patient's back of their hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, position the patient's back of their hand on the table and align your hand with the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's correct.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, with the strain of soothing plasters, treat abscesses until he can begin to feel better.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back in place after any days, the dislocated joint remains crooked.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and that his hands become so dirty, and he cannot grip anything: then you know the nerves or vessels are cut; if there is no other remedy than to strain near the wound with fire cauterization, and sometimes nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put on the plaster as we have said, then strain and leave for 5 days, then release and keep so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no cracking sound, with warm water lather, and rub until clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the displacement of fingers on the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	line:
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then they are the elbows, and push back the dislocation into place as it returns, then support the head of the arm, and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it rest for two days, then put it in the same position on another day; and from there bind as we have said, and loosen daily, and make movement again, and unbind at night; do this often until it is tightened.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is aligned; and do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	From dysfunction of the spinal column of the back, two disorders arise: one of pain and stiffness.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spinal column of the back or neck is dislocated and there are several dislocations, if there is no remedy, it swiftly harms the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are such that urination flows without control and cannot be held, and many times limbs become weakened or either of the buttocks or both arms or one leg.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	c, heal line they should bele Turot not quite the s or : e; the old as it’s (130, and thefe in this:
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you must address it if the swelling has come from childhood: there may be no remedy or healing for it entirely.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling or impacts or similar occurrences are said to be treated by old methods through grand words, which may not have much benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I've shortened it according to my intention and formed ointments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say there is no remedy or health for the gangrenes which come to the thigh before it.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and likewise those that arise directly in two sides, which cannot be treated except for those properly which come to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the sick ones should be stretched out on their face in one place equally, and have tension from them, that they do not tremble;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	J.  in the Oire:
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other on the feet, among the two pieces of wood.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And they should be firmly closed, the piece of wood as we have said, and the healer places his palms on the spine's front side until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a stick of three long arms' length, and shaken from the backside, and let the patient lie on their side, then put the middle part of the stick under the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	by the way le sis noting.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you insert two torches at the top of the patient's arm with great length, and toward the pieces on either side, having between each torch, a handspan distance in width.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each torch there is a peg, or the wick may burn, and each torch should be firmly set in the ground so that it does not move; and between each pair of torches, there is another torch turning, on which the ropes turn, and two small torches of one handspan in width to turn the wick.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then bind the rope that is among the pegs to the wick at the top, and the other rope to the peg on the opposite torch, with each assistant turning their respective wick completely, and the master places the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	When they are levelled, place a dry bandage with plenty of ointment, then the plugs, then the splint of a tablet three ounces long, to secure the gap in the bone and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nutriment until healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if nothing comes to the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint as we have mentioned before; never once should you administer a piece of lead.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And never does the appearance come to the lower spine of the back, and it is believed that these are dislocations; but it's the bone breaking, so there should be no assumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip joint dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is said that hip and shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone, not as with other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: above and below, front and back, more internally than externally, less so in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation internally is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more bent than the healthy, and the injured cannot double their knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	s f; that you's.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who it comes upon soon, is such that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign for those who it comes upon before, is that they are well with their leg according to completion; however, not doubling the pain in his back, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so yet, and retains his urine, and becomes swoleby, and when it walks, he passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who experience it later include not being able to expand their scrotum or double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the pain eases, and the shoulder head is in place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this type of dislocation is that you should check if the dislocation occurred earlier and it stays depending on its positioning, there is no need for treatment; and one must not have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocations, quickly return the joint to its place, extend it forward and backward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will correct itself, and no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	If it does not return in this way, one must call upon a strong minister and firmly support the leg with two hands or a bandage under the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and have other ministers extend their hands over the limb in such a way that they place their fists above its joints, then gently tie with a soft bandage around the thigh; others lift the head by the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend it forward and backward all at once until the patient is raised off the ground once, and then let it hang down.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four types, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, you must apply treatment to its corresponding type. When the dislocation is in the paw, it requires that you support the patient on their sound side ribs first, then place a bandage around the pelvic root, and the leg above the groin, and extend the bandage towards the knee joint, and towards the forearm;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then engage other supports to the arms, and embrace the large affected area of the pelvic side with care, and extend it towards the desired form now; this way of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	If you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong swollen ligament over the two heels and over the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let it hang from the head of a staff, and be two arms' length off the ground; then instruct one minister to embrace the patient's hips, and have another minister also hanging alongside with the patient, who embraced firmly grips the hips, for now the joint returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is on the underside, if he lies down, as we have said in those with gilbousity, and properly stretch a bandage over the affected leg and above the knee likewise;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two fires, one at the head and one elsewhere on the body, then insert a fire between the buttocks in front of the patient's backside.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place moistened pads around it so that the patient does not move, then extend each minister toward him, and he adjusts evenly with his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that is good. If not, place on a board and press as we have said in the splinting, and let the patient rest on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	When the dislocation is in front, it must be quickly extended with the affected leg, and according to what I have said; place your mirror on the pain of being above the evil limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is behind, it does not need to be extended downward nor lifted off the ground, but rather as though the leg were dislocated backward as we have said with lying on one's hands and knees.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And let it lie face down, and the ligament extended as we have said beforehand, and must be pressed against the joint at the edge of the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And it will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then bring together the buttocks, and place the yoke, and tie with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And it rests for three or four days; then remove the yoke, and place the yoke again underneath; and if you see that they are even, tie with a bandage as before, and leave for three days; then remove the yoke, and let the patient walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of shoulder joint dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joint is dislocated in three ways: this includes from within outwards and downwards, but not forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs if you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the hip, and if it does not reach the hip, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all if you have the patient sit upright, stretch their leg as much as possible, and place your back to their face, and put your feet under theirs.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	theirs c.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the poultice on it, and elevate the leg to the hip, and tie them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then release; and do not let the patient move at all until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb cannot be straightened, treat it generously as we have said in the care of the hip until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	For a dislocated ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes emaciated, and never completely realigned or properly supported.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are such that the ankle is bent, and you attempt before reaching the part where it has dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reductions are light, and the one that needs to be extended should do so gently with its hands once fully awake.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And the dretumbristionement by the hands and in front of lesseulement a laveux estesnee qui s’il se peignons les boulz ou il en lor nent le doit ne li brisez, et quels que tu siet.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then grasp the foot with your right hand, then twice with your left hand, and extend it upwards, and skillfully place the foot back in position.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this twice as we have said, pulling and supporting the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return this way, then lay the patient on their back on the ground and firmly insert a stake between their thighs in the earth, and wrap cloth around them so they do not move.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then wash the minister's thighs, and other ministers extend his feet with hands or a strap so that it wraps around the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister is extended equally, and the spatulas are placed between the patient's thighs to hold them in place while extending.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then insert equal mirrors for the dislocation between your hands, and other ministers wash the healthy leg from below; the dislocated joint will promptly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	. ça t
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it be two or three days old, and if the ligaments are weakened, strain it again; then reset on the fourth or fifth day, and prevent the patient from moving for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes beyond this term, do not be assured that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses arise, as we have said elsewhere, it is necessary to soothe them until they are healed.
des dois	Of the two joints
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both joints are dislocated, they must be stretched carefully, it is a light task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or a table directly, and then place your foot under these joints, and press firmly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	it ise and of, and the they come must be te chir lese as farme: that you may;s a p should ce to any l’d d.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not overconfident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compasserate and merciful and slow to act, do not be reckless:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	oughe so the of c.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	When you see hope, reset the limb to its place immediately, so that abscesses do not form.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the limb is in place, treat any abscesses with soothing substances and dress the wound as needed with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is a dislocation and bone fragments are present, remove them as needed, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	the Sue c
Explicit le romen de fisique	The passage explains how to treat various medical conditions using fire cautery techniques. It details steps for treating hair growth, performing blood evacuation during vein opening or abscess incision, managing wound treatment, arrow extraction, stone cutting, and dealing with dislocations. Dislocation is described as a joint issue that causes pain and injury to the patient. The text concludes by discussing physical manipulation for treating these conditions.
