O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and together with its fulfillment through explanations and statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision I came to you with this treatise, which is part of the whole work on surgery, namely "chirurgy".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is well-established in our region and it concerns everything, thus science becomes poor and dwindles, and there's no need for you to delay on these writings that ancient books have described by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and pride, understanding is closed off, and knowledge becomes distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will revive this treatise together with the organization of its course according to the method of explanation and statement, and together I will present the forms of instruments for cautery and other tools from the work with the accompaniment of declaration and preparation, as is proper in this craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands to be found in our time, the art of medicine is distorted.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is required that one who meddles in the science of anatomy as Gaius says, so long as he knows the justness of bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations from each other, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and joints and number of limbs, and their dismantling and resting positions, and their outlets.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And this is why Hippocrates said that without the art of hands we do a lot less, and with the work it is little.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not knowledgeable about things previously mentioned, then he avoids making errors and causing harm to others; therefore I have often had many more among those who meddle with this science and abandon it for practical experiments.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a foolish person who cuts - I mean incision of abscess or groin area of a woman and cleaves her arteries; because then so much blood flowed that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I see another person who betrays a large wound in a man of age; they took out with the wound a piece of the bladder, and he died thereafter within three years.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to treat it, and I saw the position of the dislocated limb and its size; so if it did not improve, then he would die from that injury.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there is another physician who took care of the duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the break he had an open wound; and the physicians' ignorance forbade them to put the fracture on the wound at the edges by great pressure, and they did not let any salt at the wound in any way, and commanded him that he would not remove it anymore; and so he waited until the leg was completely healed and the knee and joint came back to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon by him, and hurried to come undo his leg; when I saw that it was done, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every path to his corruption had already been confirmed or a part of him was affected, and he could not be cured; and the corruption continued through the limb as long as the limbs were completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another physician who collapsed his abscess inflamed by the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a boil, when it is filled with black bile and does not require the touch of iron if it's no longer in its full state to allow for complete removal of what has corrupted, as indicated by historical medical practices where excessive intervention or forceful treatment was sometimes considered counterproductive.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, examining the children, you must know that work with hands is divided into two main categories: it means that the head has danger in various positions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is fear and danger related to body positioning.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the ignorant physician does not speak ill of your work.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up arms against them, and begin your dangerous treatments firmly and quickly, and use the best method so that through God's grace you are saved and blessed; and leave to those suffering incurable diseases any hope for salvation; and strike down their arrogance because of which they doubt your abilities. And thus be it so that you can come from this world into the next one with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien warned in no way to treat illnesses with improper methods for fear that you might call the ignorant physician.
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this text into two parts.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire and wet cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of traction, and instruments for caustic treatment, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups, and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; and it is ordered with the forms of traction and animal handling.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about repositioning dislocations and twisting injuries, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and with forms of traction and animal handling.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So it is our memory from the past that requires me to indicate the quality of help and the harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtle science and secret remedy; and from this they spoke to many people, and agreed on it; and please them few words, because I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps for all conditions in which there is matter, because among these conditions are hot condition with matter and dry condition with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the case of hot and dry conditions together with matter, no one decided on it; and those said that fire cautery is great help, while others said otherwise: that fire cautery is only good for diseases caused by heat and moisture.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat-related illnesses caused by fire or moisture; and those who said the opposite said that cautery makes great help for warm and dry diseases that come from people' Written in English as requested
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the patient's body with its heat and humidity to the condition of fire, you cause bruising.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it never through experiments.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all cases, there is no harm from this method except for those who have tried it and know the master of cauteries well, and the diversity of home conditions, as well as the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the duration of treatment; we do not fear other conditions, especially cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all those who were more important agreed on it.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that fire cautery together with fire is a secret of treatments, and more mercy than burning medical caustic.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because heat is simple and does not harm anything but the member that is burned, and affects few other parts.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Medicines that come from other parts and make it appear in the affected member’s illness; and by chance occur toteis of laissons.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I found by experiment and through the length of service that I have put into it, and is situated on the verdant land of things; and for that reason, because of the length of my words, I apologize to you for not revealing the secret which has been returned or set aflame, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says in demonstration, regarding how it expels diseases from the body. Receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you know, my friend, that they agree on how long the cauteries should be performed and to what extent.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is applicable in all cases, because the sufferings relieved by the help of cautery are due to necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a longer time before greater malignities manifest themselves on the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you never think as the foolish fellow does; because to a disease healed by cautery there is no relapse; and they say it this way: But it's not so that they believe, for cauteries are not merely medicine that changes the constitution, and dries up humors which cause pain, but rather acts as urgent treatment of value due to the virtue of their work and their authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there is an issue that the disease grows no more according to the constitution and nature of the malady and its virtue; and they accumulate superfluities in it through acquisition of meats and similar things, provided cauterization takes place quickly or with little moisture and excess, like cauteries for pain from dense areas, and similar things do not bring back pain as often. But this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that cauterization is called the 'backbone of medicine,' and it's a matter to observe; but they don't believe that cauterization holds any value after other forms of treatment, as their understanding is misguided, for we apply various treatments in no disease and none of them are worth it, so we apply cautery, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	But cauterization does indeed have the backbone of medicine, not according to the understandings of some wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient said that the instrumental cauterization of gold is more effective than iron, and they said it not for the quality of gold or the highness of its substance; and they said that the teeth of the cautery do not cause ruin, but this isn't seen as I have tested, and I found in some people. And instrumental cauterization is more effective than iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	A chascun:age de forter malgreveintures, etent ilgeant lignit ence en cautere.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	:erlements:erleves. ousurecause the erupeut:ent. Let'ing. Thisesun :ertjacorre. Ipsum. Whatretearlore:esque, andire, unlockere.usera. Hereupon it:es:
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you command this chapter concerning the head justly placed, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Double olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are due to moisture and cold applied under the head, and in them there have been two causes: one caused by a disease called "soda," and another from various humors that descend upon both heads, ears, and for many dreams and pain of density and throat pain, most especially with all diseases coming from cold so as paralysis and stroke and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the maladies are purged by medicine solvent, removing the head .iij. or .iiij., depending on what the virtue and ease and custom allow the patient to suffer; and then make over again the head of the malady.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then it shall fit between your hands, and put your hands on the piece of flesh; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nail between its .ij. fingers; and if blood comes from the incision, warm up the olive oil cautery which is called "olivaire," for thus it is formed:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And you put on the mark with ink, and draw your hand downward and extract it little by little turning; then lightly touch your hand again, and reward the wound if you see the bone .i. small piece; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take a few threads of silk, and place them in soft and moist cotton, and put on the mark again, and leave for three years; afterwards cover with fat wax; and let it warm until the fracture heals, so long as it is cured.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that as more time passes over the wound, it purges more; and for this reason they help mice.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that you must let the cautery rest until a part of the bone is set free, and then resume this which belongs to the bone, and care for it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	llatragreisn's. What itel,sesin thewinter oflater: Cureticle. Commentaire ​rexine develle. A:seu. Forget teguron:thems:les chrissoe de.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in all aspects, fires that no man has ever had reason for fear; and I think I should leave them; because the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous fluid solutions, as we see in other members too; and myself when the patient's shoulder is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salve and medicated for me, and with this use I am now helping.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	The chief pain from an inguinal hernia.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	If in the whole pain it comes chronically and lasts long, then it should use its weak shoulders with cochineal pills and "cochies" (a term possibly referring to certain medicinal treatments), and draining of chief and oils and plasters; and if they subject them to the cautery we have mentioned before, and it is not valuable.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful that the patient's shoulder with a strong nature should not be too cold; but rather the cautery on that area a little bit as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization on each bone of the area just under the os (bone), as we have said before; and do an additional cautery or "vasselz" (possibly referring to a type of surgical tool); and it is in this way that you raise your hand so that you do not see the bone: the weak patient feels too much greater pain with this cauterization than with others, and I will speak about them elsewhere; and it must be that the cauteries on the horns are more subtle than those used for most of the chief'e sore, and it is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	This line appears to be a standalone statement referring to two types or instances of cauterization associated with pain. In a medical text from that period, this would likely describe different approaches or techniques for treating chronic pain through cauterization of the area around the joint responsible for such discomfort.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in part of the chief pain there comes sudden soreness, and it is extended to the oil (perhaps implying that the condition spreads), and the shoulder joint is cleansed with universal medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned regarding disease division—but none of this profits; yet if you do cauterization according to two methods [of treatment], namely medicine water and iron:
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	: the following. Ifingue of thek :entire ait enjacin the:laterrexentailla, le codexere, buttergall italex25 (meaningth century: Thejourrexent:sac:
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment until he is sound; and if you see that there are any of these incendiary remedies I have written about or treated regarding incendiary remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery so that its shape resembles this:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a clover or it has little curvature, and in shape appears only slightly; and he places on the painful spot with your hand and restore most of it lightly, until the edge of the spear's point is bare; and let your hand that the artery does not burn, but moves further away, and abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on the thread and putting it on the painful spot for three years; then I put moistened wool there, and he treats this ulcer with incense until it is sound; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellate," at all points of the point, and do not cover the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	from migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migraines as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and do not benefit from it at all, because he says that in medicine the iron before called "cultellate" must be heated until white; and then place a line half a dozen fingers long on the dry spot with your hand once, and strap so as to not puncture the artery, but let it remain moveless on the bone; and warn me of my jaw that becomes mute when touched, and the nerves do not show discomfort or spasm in a patient, and tell me how to allow sanguineous drainage from the artery after it is drained, or bloodletting has taken place; and leave this subject for me; but I will tell you how the bone becomes tender when the artery is punctured, and show you on these pages where in the book it is written that it appears.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this iron does not affect the disease at all and the patient suffers, then cauterize it in the same way as we have said before, and treat the wound so long until it is sound; and if you observe it, administer the iron which we have mentioned or the one used for extracting an artery, with two knives; and these irons are better than those and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of pain in the ears from a cold source
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the pain in the ear comes from frost and coldness, and he has applied remedies that we have said in this division of diseases, and these pains do not cease, then heat this iron cauterizer which is called "pins", as it appears:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	nent,le, and theu:eslustre, leu theoreiallumeinish. enge de laire itis (13rdiscene : œrise. Forencontre istoi entorne withoutiure ofssejurine aillet:arai queen morce:ent.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture which must be treated with cautery is not those caused by fire but only those that move from mucus, just as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform any cauterizations for symptoms that come from emitting phlegm or sneezing.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of mucus-related torture which involves earwax and nasal discharge, along with gargling, it does not hold true that you should perform three cauterizations on the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and a third in the alignment between the two jaws; place the cautery where the area is open, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above some part of the head, and another near the temples as well, so that the discharge stops entirely; this is the form for the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the kind of cautery we have described before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I've previously mentioned, provided it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have previously discussed, it does not benefit the patient at all, and the ailing do not develop a fever, but rather fourteen cauterizations: twelve on the two horns of the head above the forehead, one in between them; one takes out the head, and another is called "vassels" as we have previously described, and caution must be given to the area underneath the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of cautery by fire
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This malady requires giving the patient long years and medicines that moisten the brain; afterwards, they examine the chief of the sick person thoroughly, and place upon his occiput a pinch of nutmeg written in books or treatises on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: as I have said before.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is sound after this treatment, good; and if not, then they apply three cauteries to the chief of the patient by pulling down towards the collarbone and leaving a space between each one (one for every caustic), with heavy doses given (.i. de gross); and they treat as others do when you add it, and if the sick person suffers, then apply another caustic in the middle; and if necessary, two other on the ears, and treat until he is sound again; and these are called "olivares," as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	Of cold caustic applied to the head (leader of the patient)
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the leader of the sick person be moistened with years and everything we have said before; after examining the chief of the sick man, then he applies caustic to the head and on each horn (horns), one behind and three on the spine of the collarbone; if you know more about it, and the leader is damp and the sick person suffers, and the disease is severe, then he applies three cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let him hold his hand up as long as possible until the keel grows arrows, and treat until he is sound again, and this is called "olivares," which we have already mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy (a neurological disorder characterized by recurrent seizures)
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use forceful caustic on those who are phlegmatic (having a temperament characterized by an excess of phlegm in the body), and it is necessary first to moisten the brain with years and other cures that we have previously mentioned, in the division when the malady is large and severe.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	surement:esce lexinumbreatere. Whatene, andercises aitsecre enjurse:noselet:caracter. Forstir demejorent (withoutalic:rime se; ilion :iantire.t.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, then he makes a subtle cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	By the cause of melancholy are surpluses or corrupted moistures and heavy humidity, which is why we have mentioned to those who suffer paralysis the strong cauterization with small scissors as we've said before.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy are declining surpluses and the patient's corrupted wetness related to melancholy, then he should drink something so that his brain is purified accordingly, as it appears in front of the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the leader of the patient has been treated; after making .i. tortile of lin well made, like .i. circle, and he places it on the head; and the malady's parts are crossed and securely held in all places; afterwards, the linen is covered with burlap from ancient bears; and the fire applied immediately so that he can endure it, and after evacuating the circle around the chief, let the patient cool down; then make this treatment once a week, alternating with other suitable governments until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see the patient being cauterized by making more punctures throughout the entire cautery, this method of cauterization greatly softens the brain; and then put it in a cotton ball with waxed linen and lard of wildcat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the first signs appear as I have mentioned in the division, and then begins to drink something purifying the head, and he is kept away from all moistures, and his sweat or bath is done several times without food.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to revive his head by applying heat and performing .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples where signs of dislocation are present in either one location or another; then throughout all the cautery, every vein and artery that pass through the heart area is targeted, following along its length within the temple's breadth, and he instructs to manage bleeding, if you see too much blood coming out, then lance it with consideration for what you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to manage the bleeding during artery extraction and incision; and it is never done by applying heat or cutting inside the .ij. bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The two corners of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and usual and situated by veins, or near arteries as seen on the face's surface; and one can see that it is due to cold fleshy rheumatism, then he applies the same cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of lowering the eyes: .i. cauterizes the head, and .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauterizations or puncturing inside the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, then he performs another small puncture above the spot.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The two corners of the tears
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When the medicines are taken as we have mentioned in our division, it does not help at all, instead he drinks a purifying substance for the malady .ij. nuiscoches; after that, he revives the head and performs one or multiple cauterizations of the olive type on the temples' crosses called "claviles"; and makes several small cauterizations in the area near the veins (called 'ij.' indicating an unspecified number); and warns about not congesting the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the shape of the cauterization that is called "clavicle": This reference could be describing the physical characteristics or method, which might relate to some procedure involving an area, presumably.
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	d'lords.sufectifreviener:give causeurfierguevaindecomprectiforentecrecheletheuren, le nomprecthecelle.ingible, Theves an
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see in two cauteries on the two shoulders also long hairs like the shoulder joints are; and do not let go of them unless the third part of the skin has been burned, as I have said before.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The following text is a complex Old French medical document from the late medieval period, specifically related to ophthalmology and eye surgery techniques:
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There has never been an occasion where the hairs of the eyes were turned into spots and caught oil, and they hold it, and then we make cauterizations according to II ways; that is to know whether by fire or by hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the cautery by fire commands that the patient let the hairs (corneal endothelium) grow long and even; and if they are touched at their base, it is restrained so they do not move until they come into being.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they come into being and become even, then the malady is placed on your soul; afterwards a figure is drawn on the skin wherein it shall be as if by fire's smoke, and whether it begins with the sign near the hairs; then cotton moistened in oil and musk is laid upon the eye, and the cautery of this kind takes its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization of the figure you have drawn so little and so often, let it burn at that place; and the signs of health from your past are that you see the skin retracting, and the hairs raised to the point where the oil is; then lift your hand there and leave for now .iij. years, and put moistened cotton in burdock until it soothes the bone; afterward the treatment of ointment as long as healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And afterward the hairs come back and the paper is mollified, if as you have begun; and the hairs are deformed again, so that they do not cauterize until the paper be raised to its natural state, and don't touch the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a paper shape from the leaf of myrtle; take soap flakes and hot oil, one each .Z., and grind them together well; apply it hastily so that it does not cool, then sprinkle it on top of the shaped paper as if it were covered with myrtle leaves, and place the hairs thereon; if the illness is confined to just one oil, treat it accordingly in the same manner, and if both are involved also; place cotton soaked in warm vinegar underneeuf; and the patient's shoulder be in your care and show its position on your medicine, and press a little bit every time the ill person feels sensation from the medicine, as they would feel if it were done with fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have done this for a long time, then the medicine has taken its due course.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the sensation from the medicine has passed, lift up the hair again, and if you see the paper lifted as though it had been raised by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, that is well done. If not, put more medicine on the hair or if the medicine has not yet worked, until your interventions are equal, and your fingers in order; then place a cotton pad moistened with burdock root therein as long as the arsenic ointment, also called "dyafenis," and others, keeps the wound clean, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you know well that you must carry out your work with great care so it does not reject the medicine on the hairs. If the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then resume the medicine on those loosened by the paper, as you have done before; afterwards cure until healed; and this is the form of myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And you know that the size of the men is diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this they are your constraints; and do not repeat the right path for those whose study of this art it is.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your care; and tie up his head between your hands so that it does not move or protest its chief; afterwards apply cotton moistened with olive oil or olive juice on the oil, then heat the cautery as if it were half a feather of an arrowhead; now whether the patient' Written in Old French.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula it becomes overtightened, and I extract the pus and drainage; if it is closed, then do the work and pull out the bowel; after that place the hot cautery firmly on the affected area under the oil where your hand will not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come at the beginning of the cautery on the bone, it would be better. But if not, then restart the cautery once more, and in case you have experience, let it for 2 years; afterwards place cotton moistened with wax, and treat the drying ointment until it is healed, for 40 days or so, until the bone becomes exposed, and apply corrosive medicine to it as much as needed. Accordingly, when that comes up in his case, report it to your master.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there was a way to perform a cautery on an abscess that none of the ancients had mentioned. When dealing with an abscess, first cleanse its opening; afterwards place under the small incision a thin needle made from bone in the shape of that area'ited.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And we do about the amount of .з. (a unit of measurement), and hold the bone needle firmly in your hand so that it does not move; to prevent the molten fat from coming into contact with its oil, it is necessary to place moistened cotton on a clean white cloth or woolen napkin over it; this process restores the proper function of the abscess and promotes healthy healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the abscess is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that's good. But if not, it must be administered to the nerve, and bring back the fistula to its original position according to what should be done in your own case.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	There have been many instances of cracks in the lips that are called "peeling," and particularly in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you heal these cracks as we have described in the sections, and this treatment does not bring benefits, then apply a small round-tipped culture-type needle to it according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the hot needle immediately in those cracks while they are still open, and after that treat the affected area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes from the root of the throat or in the uvula, or at the roots of the teeth, and it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the divisions, but with no benefit: then it must be that you use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after removing the abscess drainage, hold your hand where the bone is exposed, and make it so, and do this once or .ij. times as we have said in treatments, until it has healed; and if it is treated thus, it's good; and if it's not, then you must disclose the bone corrupt, according to what vould you find in your master.
dou movement des dens	
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicine which does not work then place the chief of the sick person on your health; after shaving the cautery that will come here afterwards in a similar manner as you put a cane on the tooth; and pour hot water into the cautery immediately, and hold your hand tightly so that the patient feels heat coming from the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the mouth with salty water, and let the teeth bleed for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in the same way the one which was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are retained tightly, and the moistened spirits corrupted.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain in teeth.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain in teeth comes from colder temperatures or slight cooling, or it's cold and damp weather; when medicine does not work then one must use cautery according to the manner: and cautery of tallow and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The tallow cautery is such that you prepare a spoonful of wax or lead; after applying cotton and wrapping it over the tip of a tent, and molding moistened wax therein, and immediately place it on the sore tooth hastily and hold tightly so that the tooth becomes cool again; and then do this often until its virtue wears off at the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool is frayed, and put a spoonful thereof made of tallow on the next tooth, and place it upon one iron heated so much that the fat melts at the crown of the second tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	: theca: apresque (biet. Theurs.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make fire cautery on the head of the shoulder that you wish, and according to what you can do; and this is the shape of the scar.
des scrophules	Sores or ulcers (referring to skin lesions, possibly discussed in medieval medicine)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophulae are of fluid and cold moisture, not responding to medicines, after which the shape appears, and they have four openings for the fluids to exit from another part; and apply cautery on the apotome once, or twice as needed until it moves at the tip of the apotome; if the apotome is small, then apply cautery according to the size of the apotome, and leave it for three years; afterward place cotton soaked in woolen cloth until healing occurs. And afterwards treat the skin with ointments and bandages as long as it remains sound.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures conquer the channels of the mouth, and especially when it comes from cold constitution, then it must be cleansed first with solvent medicines; afterward apply fire to the root of the throat, but ensure you do not come back up the throat, nor scald but a little. Afterward, apply another cautery at the union between the neck and the head of the spine, which we call "clavicle," as we have described previously; and treat the wound accordingly until it is healed.
de la toust	The term 'touste' likely refers to an old French word for a type of tumor or swelling (possibly related to lumps or bumps on the skin, which could be linked to various medical conditions). However, without more context from the original text, providing an accurate modern English translation is challenging. The term may also require interpretation based on its usage in Old French texts during that period of medicine and surgery.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	All diseases of the mouth are of cold moisture, and the disease has no fever or chills, and it is an ancient disease, so you make two cauterizations on the gums in those areas previously mentioned; and another cautery at the site between the breasts; and treat the cauterization according to the shape described previously. The term 'clavile' here refers again to a type of cautery, specifically one used for treating certain conditions as per the descriptions provided in older medical texts or practices.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, apply fire to all the points that are called "points" of this kind; the shape is like this in the disease of the ears; and let the points be here at XXX or slightly deeper; after curing the wound according to what has been said before, and treat with cauterization at three stabs following this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauterization is lighter for that reason, making it three times to the cubit (which in medieval terms would refer to approximately 18 inches or about 45 centimeters). However, it's essential to note this measurement can vary based on individual interpretations of Old French texts. The reference to a "cubit" is an approximation for modern understanding and may not directly align with actual measurements used at the time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	The mention of 'dislocation of the shoulder joint' in this context refers to a medical condition where the bones of the arm (the humerus) become misaligned from their normal position within the socket of the shoulder blade, often due to trauma or injury. In medieval medicine, dislocations would be managed through practices like cauterization and manual manipulation, reflecting the limited surgical options available at the time.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it must be reset of ce nouvel. de la bone, etreche:especs d’or ounces, a pointure desorce smais, mesures pour adore tene avant leu alafortune esmeans aspeech encompote thees cafeinonfait ofte prefecture.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After being dislocated at the back and side of his shoulders; after loosening the kneecap which is inside the tendon with both hands, if it gets displaced there, then pull out the cautery that has two holes where the shape indicates it.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the kneecap as much as it penetrates on the side, and come back with all four heated needles; because that is how cautery is made using one needle with three holes, for this reason the figures of cauterization are these three needles; and they correspond to the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the needle with three holes.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And it has never been touched upon the first nerve so that there are seven needles.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery on it with wire; after letting the patient rest, and not allowing his limbs to be moved for as long a time as he is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, this hardly happens, but a cautery is made on the thick heated needle or with many needles pulling; because the joint is referred to the bone marrow and the soft tissue of the shoulder is healthy.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The two-needle cautery for bleeding.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must perform bleeding cauteries with the roots of aristologos, and in this manner: take a root of aristologos as long as you can find, whether it be dry or fat and also long; smear it with olive oil, and roast it in fire, and make one needle between the shoulder blade and the collarbone, and two small ones just below the neck where there is hair on both sides of the face; and two more cauteries behind the fifth rib, slightly descending towards the back side; and one needle inside the hip joint, another above it; and between the outer hips a few other similar cauteries in sequence, all being between each other as they are further apart; and do not press your hand but openly apply them as if smelling flowers.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And none of the ancients said that any man used a heated iron cautery resembling a barber's razor, and they heat it and put it between the shoulders, as long as it goes to the abscess; and his pain leaps up like what we have mentioned in the abdomen. But in this treatment there is fear or the maladies are now dead, or an inflammation occurs that cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of this mouse because we have said in our discussions about curing methods, it does not benefit at all, for indeed they apply three good ways to cauterize that everyone knows.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of which there is one way in that you do two, or three, according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the caustic fluid we have said before; and do not put your hand anywhere on all the caustic, but often on its backside as well.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Furthermore exists another method of cauterization in which one applies a caustic that has two points as we have demonstrated concerning the dislocation of the shoulder; and it is vital to position the point where the mouse lies, or the direction from which its pain originates, typically towards the patient's left side, adjusting the height of the application according to the curvature of the spine, and the caustic itself must be sized in accordance with the curve of the shoulder.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Subsequently ignite the two points of caustic to such an extent that their application is perceived on the opposite side, and then thrust the instrument, thereby having a total of three applications; if you notice, it should be applied to all three points. After this procedure, when it has caused purulence over a long duration, which justifies the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	From inflammation (Here is an additional point that may be relevant in a medical text discussing various outcomes or sequelae following certain procedures, such as cauterization.)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cauterization is not without its merits, for it serves in cases of acute "asclytes" (acute conditions or sudden flare-ups). When you treat according to the methods we have outlined in our divisions on cautery and your treatment does not yield results, indeed it requires that you perform three more cauterizations both around inflammation, one each upon the stomach, liver, mouse (possibly referring to an organ or pathological process), and two beneath the spine along the vertebrae, and one towards the end of the backside near the tail; and ensure that the caustic is applied closely to the painful area on the spine.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After allowing the caustic to remain in place for a prolonged period, and not ceasing the treatment of the painful area afterward; recovery would be expected, and together with all three applications, aid from God will ensue.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the caustic for the abdomen is such as we have previously shown; and that which applied to the backside, according to what it has been demonstrated herein.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen due to watering (edema), and they are covered with yellowish discoloration, it is necessary that you perform incision on the back of the hand between the ring finger and little finger; and move your hand gently while using the cautery. And do not pierce too deeply, so as not to create new watering spots, and apply the cauterization according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing incision on both legs at the tip of the chisel, and applying the cautery along one side of the thigh in front and the other behind it, inside the leg, let the cauterizations continue long enough to allow healing; after treating the remaining treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	from the medication
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution for the stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as it weakens both the retentive and digestive virtues of the stomach and intestines, which cannot be cured by any treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, perform .i. great incision on the stomach according to what he has mentioned before, or incision on the stomach with a small cautery that circulates around .iiij. fine incisions beneath one another, and .ij. incisions on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture accumulating and the patient suffering, then perform .i. incision on the groin, and .ij. small incisions on each side of the intestine, and .ij. little incisions near the large stomach, because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are foundations or multiple occurrences, and they are old and cold, moist, and decayed humors, they are treated as we have mentioned in divisions, and it does not profit from performing: .iij. incision on the spine of the back, located far behind the anatomical landmark, with small incisions that move forward and backward like a triangle, and .i. small incision beneath the abdomen. .iiij. more such incisions.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think the stomach is cool, and the meat does not cook properly, and see swelling of the face, therefore apply .i. large incision on the stomach as we have said before, and .i. other incision on the liver, and .iiij. such incisions along all the clavicle; let the cauterization last long enough until it heals completely. Afterward perform treatment of the skin so that it is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of charnosity which is named "thell"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	If you copes althelul leu.
de plaie mal curee	Of wounds ill treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	As the patient cannot endure cutting or incision, we will tell them herein, if a sickness comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If a fistula does not come into existence and is old, with dirtiness and moisture-corroded, you must prove to understand all the tent's depth, and place the cautery as if it were a razor, according to how much of the tents has entered the fistula. Then resume the cautery until those corrupted parts are removed, once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed; and warn you of the nerves involved, and large veins. If the fistula leads to the bladder and intestines, then protect from these things in their entirety, thinking that it is not inherently dangerous; after curing until it has healed completely, and if its lining is stone-like, you will know that the tract is entirely healed. And if the matter within is bone, but corroded bones, then do as we have described herein.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of frost comes as rain and heavy winds, and does not take from a woman, it must be that you perform cautery on one side of the rains and another with a clavicle hook that we have previously mentioned; and if in such environment our cauterizations were three in line, then there will be greater assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	lions çoinfyrejerme a meinthe thisantoiquarryngesignentifarreture parisocanausare:savoirs, untilsemblance:nde  mentions:this creintrefaire:se greintheuisseurs  13ireviseuengentiqince frompeffectaungeur ifccur
de la marris	from a stone
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, it does not allow conception, and the flowers are decayed and their ends come late; and when they appear, there is great pain: therefore it must be done with three incisions around the belly, as we have said about the cautery for the bladder, and three incisions on the back; and a clavicle incision, as we have mentioned. (This translation assumes "marrix" refers to a condition or procedure related to marrow rather than bone anatomy since direct reference is absent.)
de la hainche	From the hiccough (Note: The original text may not explicitly mention 'hiccough', but based on medical context involving incisions and treatments, this translation attempts to link it with a related condition that might be treated similarly. However, without more specific information from Old French text, linking "de la hainche" directly is speculative.)
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous mucus descends into the hiccough sphincter, causing it to lose its position, and this signifies that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the limb's divided part lying within the hiccough sphincter area, which must be cauterized on the hiccough sphincter at two incisions resembling a circle around it, and before the sphincter as it turns, so that the hiccough is spread throughout the circle; and such incisions should be made like those used for cauterizing the stomach. (This translation assumes "de la hainche" was related to symptoms or treatments concerning hiccoughs and sphincters, based on common medical terminology.)
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these incisions are not present, then make three large incisions like the olive grove's stakes, and perform them as you do with all other knives; and treat it until it is healed. (This translation uses "olive grove" metaphorically to describe a pattern of incisions that might resemble rows or patterns found in an olive orchard.)
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain from the hiccough (Note: The original text, while discussing treatment methods and symptoms relating to the hiccough sphincter, does not directly mention "pain from the hiccough." This translation is constructed around general concepts of discomfort associated with hiccoughs.)
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes from the hiccough sphincter, and it is due to cold and moisture, and this malady must be cured as we have said in its division, and the curing does not work well; since the disease is ancient: therefore it must be purged of the large humors with foul-smelling tablets or other similar bland tablets. (This translation connects various symptoms like pain to treatments for old diseases, as described in historical medical texts, possibly reflecting a broader understanding of hiccoughs and related conditions.)
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After making the incisions; and the manner of these incisions is according to two methods: namely, taking together medicines in hot form, and flaming incision according to various techniques, which are as follows: for you must make three triangular incisions in this shape on the hiccough sphincter, making it deep and broad, and leave a distance of about two spans between each incision, and be that incision similar to an olive stake; never made an incision within the middle of the hiccough sphincter for this purpose, according to this shape: (This translation attempts to elaborate on specific surgical techniques used in historical times related to treating conditions affecting the hiccough sphincter, including triangular incisions and the use of heat therapy.)
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see the cautioner to the hiccough sphincter (Note: "d'epei dea. It is used cautery of a hundred yearn que leu ence enven. Si vous descuite quittant la haincs.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hunchback and does not reach either to the thigh or to the leg; and if it comes to the thigh and the leg, they perform .ij. cauterizations there where the malady says that the pain is held, and .i. cauterization above the ankle, and .iiij. does on the left side a little bit; and either cuticular cautery or arthritic flare up wherever it feels the pain, so they cauterize there where it feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. with the instrument called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the skill is there, then they do more; and when the pain lies on either side of the genitals towards the thigh, they perform a cuticular or circular cauterization very well in all their cauterizations so that the instrument does not burn too much nerves and large arteries, and to avoid causing further harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen others who cauterized the joint above the knee where the pain is felt, and they allowed it until the leg was fully released, and even the ankle as well, and examined and ruptured all the pieces of bone; afterwards, after a stomach solution which led to death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in .ij. parts together, perform cauterization on one and on the other according to this manner. // The surgeenas said during the cauterization of the hunchback, that's how it should be done; make .i. such iron piece and either as thick as a nun's knuckle or a little less, and place it between teeth-like grooves or just like one over the other with an approximate distance equal to the length of a finger; and arrange the grooves across .ij. parts, and make them like teeth, and have .i. handful of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until all are red and gently felt, and then place it on the malady's hunchback bone, and turn it over the healthy side; the cauterist will perform .i. cauteries again and leave for .iij. years; and make an emplastrum of fat, and let the wound heal over a length of ten feet; afterward, when the treatment with oil has been done as long as it is sound.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim said that we use little of this cauterization for the patient's sake, and if we see only a few who undergo it; but overall, these are good cauteries, which can be endured by him, and when they begin to alleviate the pain.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of two legs
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When the pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or too great evacuation, or by spreading cold material, there is no comparison for these signs except cautions with ice-cold material being introduced into the patient's vein.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that the bad wounds be void of fetid pills or similar things, made upon his back where the pain holds three lines of indentation, and in each line four or more times according to its virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and it should be done with the "pincers" according to the type called so, and if you see, make 3 or 4 strikes or more depending on this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes upon little children, and the signs of its onset are that they become constricted above where it clings, and fear; and you turn in the spine's backbone and observe the appearance coming from other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it and have treated it, if you cauterize with the "cellery" according to this form. (Note: "Cellery" does not correspond to known historical medical terms; assuming a transcription error or archaic term in use here.)
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the "pincers" purge each part of the vertebrae equally. And if you see, if it is cauterized along the spine with the striking pincers making 2 or 3 lines and keeping them close together; after this treatment let it heal according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer pincers in a slimy state containing nerve matter.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads on each limb' Cook it up; when the pain comes in pieces, they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is cold-caused, medicines cannot cure it, so it must be treated with cauteries in parts: make much of the scything pincers upon the joint, and let them use the hafted pincer according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need that you strike the point on the face of the joint, making cautery with the pointed pincer called "point". And when pains descend to the genitals and other joints, often such things happen; make cautery in each joint part, upon all the hafted pincer according to this form: And if you have practiced more, do it so. But hold your hand not further than it is necessary for curing the pain.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	:
de la routure dou syfac	Of the route of surgery
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the route comes in anger, and the belly descends as if newly born, it is essential that when you see him curing, he does not vomit throughout the day; and let him lie on his back between your hands, commanding him to turn his wrists so they are repaited, and rasp them at your discretion, and from there begin the surgery on the bone of the pommel, and with a sign that is similar to half of a circle above the heart; then heat the cautery as it has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	As long as it's white and smooth-feeling. Then scrape the belly areas back to their original shape; he instructs his hand so it doesn't return arrows; works well on both thighs of the patient, placing a cussion and sergeant there, along with another similar instrument beneath the thighs that will also heat the hands; then apply the cautery in this manner across your whole palm, holding up your right and left arm until you fix the bone, but if it breaks on the first attempt, continue heating it as long as necessary for the bone's repair. Be subtle when using the cautery so the belly doesn't burst or cause other harm to the patient due to the malaise.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And remember that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. It is required that the cauteries used for children be applied gently according to their size, and those for larger individuals also proportionally; after three years of treating it with burnt wax until it becomes ossified; afterwards treat other ointments as long as healed, keeping in mind that his malaise lasts for forty days on his back so that the fracture is well set. It is required that their movements be restrained continuously to prevent the belly from protruding when they get up and go into rooms.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty years when he wishes to get up, he should be fitted with a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days; then have a good rest, avoiding too much work, excessive drinking of alcohol, overeating, and high vocal strain; when he has done this lesson fully, then is he completely healed. I will mention this after the treatment with cautery in his master's practice.
de la routure dou ventre	From the route for the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	lou cas, et il ysans les enlalice la ceteau semblant paroles devening theuccle meafeiij century (100's leu in itjacme toastretran.victims aesle: ices as-lyssentures, ceaceus:ecellos.xil:age. Itorinjus. il. Thecaisse.commen:sacre.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the point of entry and make an incision above the route, and another one deeper, and with your hand encircle all around the caustic needle. But the first cauteries are thinner and more wrinkled.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in no limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When the pain comes in no limb, or from falling or injuring oneself, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is of no value, then it must be cautioned with the pincers called "poins," and the cautery should correspond to the length of the member and its weaknesses and virtues and position of twists and pain. If the first cautery heals well, that's good; but since custom dictates that it must change for the limb near at hand, you must perform the cauteries until the patient no longer feels pain.
de meselerie	This term does not directly translate to an English phrase with a clear meaning within the context of medieval medicine or general discourse. However, if we were to attempt a broad interpretation based on available knowledge of Old French and medical practices:
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The wounds are helped by the caustic needle at no time, and especially the disease that comes from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it cauterizing the malady in its beginning? And if it is treated as we have said in this division, and does not stray or linger, so that you doubt whether corruption will affect the whole body, then make two caustic needles: one at the top of the wound, and the other towards the temple's end; and four on the horns, and five behind the skull. And let your hand be long enough until the cautery bends to the bone, and so that the scars come out as far from it as possible for the vapors of gross humors to escape from them; and cauterize on the muscle according to its position in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	If the craftsmanship is dispersed everywhere, and it manifests clearly, for you must use of these caustic needles from those that we have said previously or chiefly, one on the knife near the spine, and two on the backbone, and twenty-five on the knees, and a great underneath, and some on each joint; and twenty-two on the hips, and another.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	geanimexan cribe:decanseurifirefy, presentura. hevelangeableccellexentiuphitechevesque ifère andocherre,a.projetifreve:lance (southeloignes. Atroletifre
de enfleure	of growth
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	Sprouting comes from no member and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it's not healthy, however, they apply cautery to the limb according to its size and proportions; and a little bit penetrates into the fleshy part of the joint where there is nerve supply. And never done cauterization on hand and arm and back, at the exit of the nerve causing the member to be deformed, and thus it's bone growth; and everything else doesn't happen without knowing about members and moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of alabasters
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	The disease that affects "alabaster" is old, and the treatment of medicine doesn't do anything, so they cauterize it with a little bit of cautery according to the size of the joint; as long as the white stone turns into bone and its color changes, then treat it repeatedly with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and goose's blood for each part; mix them all together, and bind it tightly so that it remains healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cauterization of a sore
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore appears at its beginning and you see to arrest it, if you cauterize with a cautery that seems like .i. circle; thus healing is said in every case; and what I don't seem right about is that they also apply cautery around the sore's center, as we have stated many times before; however, I fear it may become ulcerated and rotten, and I never wanted to do it again; but rather the proper thing is to cauterize inside with a cautery called "circular," if you agree with what we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of growth that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Someone may have a disease called "adubelati," and it delays death or from its excess of bones (which is to mean excessive growth, orbits him. And you observe: forlittle cauterization around the whole; afterward. Because she will delay her.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	liste,entifiquele andifreveucongevel sections ​1213nciteuxellet
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" so long as the cautery has cut through the vein, and let such cautions be done to the sickle that the ill's pain is dispelled in any part manner like the course of diarrhea. Afterward, until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens," which is essentially a joint inflammation, as it affects the limbs just like fire burns dry leaves. If you see this illness that can be treated with cautery together with fire, then hold the cauldrons very small and large according to what is necessary for the joint or the disease; after treating all of them until the corruption has been removed, nothing remains of the disease except everything that was rotten should be osteit. And then let it remain for three years, and on these burned cauldrons apply oil so that the eviction of fire is complete, and all the rot infected areas heal; after this treatment with ointments generated from charcoal. If you see in three years that there are no signs of recovery, that's good; but if it doesn't recover, then again caution should be applied to those limbs that have not been treated. This joint inflammation was never cured by medical oil with fire at the site of cautery; however, all treatment with fire is much more helpful, and I have already said about the healing process for the division: take as much as you know how.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Infections that come from stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often it happens that stones produce a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great thing that bleeds the stone; the treatment for this disease can be in two ways. That is fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is as if you are using a pin with such a spike made of good iron, and it should have just enough thickness to allow the nail to penetrate through all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after setting it on top of the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it begins to bend at the point where the nail is inserted; then let it rest for 2 years while it starts bleeding. Then make a poultice of known herbs ground with rope, and leave it on the stone all night, and the nails will be pulled out of its roots. Afterward heal the joint with charcoal ointment applied until it has been completely cured.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	lou theor:er. Aprementent the malad. other iten laisse.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If any shivers from coldness of the body, or quartan fever, or other similar ailments, it must be that you perform .iiij. (23) cauterizations or .iv. (4) on the spine's dorsal side, .i. (1) between each vertebra; and .i. (1) on the ribs, and .i. (1) on the stomach with the olive cautery; thus it will leave the body shivering from the coldness of the illness.
des pustules puans	This phrase translates to "pustules appearing" in English. In a medical context from the 12th-13th centuries, it might refer to the emergence or formation of blister-like lesions on the skin associated with various diseases and conditions prevalent at that time.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	None of the time have baths appeared by external causes, or pustules, which arise from large corrupt materials. When they appear, it must be that on every chief of the pustule: one fine point made of fir wood, if it is fixed with fire, or root of alismama long or a lenticular cautery; and nevertheless once cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and cannot grow further, but are dismantled from the superfluous matter by which they arise, and become sound; yet it must be that this is done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	This phrase translates to "when the artery is blocked" in English. In a medical context from this period, it would refer to an obstruction or constriction of blood vessels that impedes normal blood flow, which could lead to various health complications and required interventions based on the understanding and practices available at that time.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there occurs large hemorrhages from the blocked artery to the wound that appears at a pressure point, or incising the abscess, or on cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very unfortunate when one becomes entrapped (estenchier).
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in all such cases when it happens to you, if at once put your index finger on the wound vein, and strain much so that the flow of blood is stopped within your finger, and there's no more coming out; then apply several olive cauteries both small and large until everything turns red; then take .i., or great or little according to the nature and location of the wound and vein, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep pressing the cautery there so that the blood flow is stopped in the vein.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps up above your finger when you have extinguished the olive cauteries on that vein, and you take immediately .i. other of those cauteries which are applied to fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	sou it'onex. Andre. (13rd century. Andante: theire. And thenace.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will dress the ligament tightly or put things underneath, or other similar things, if it does not provide much benefit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens that there is none and he has no more or medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound in vein as we have said before, and stretch it up above the wound and the vein; and let him not move it, but keep the moisture cold as much as possible so that it does not become frozen and swollen until necessary to perform cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for surgery.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter that such a disease requires fire or medicine-laden cauterization, and various preparations and causes and stimulants and forms of cautery; and I have introduced this main section here with an outline for easier navigation on what we will develop further.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so I begin, it is essential for you to know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cauterizations, which requires much greater precaution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there are often instances of blood evacuation when opening a vein, and making an incision above the abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, leading to many deaths.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to embark on recklessness. As many people come in treatments from such individuals who suffered so greatly with their illness that they died quickly due to the harsh treatment and pride of their sickness, which is something we should be wary of.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these who have their sensibility and say: "Wait, I am safe"; and the disease is stubborn. You do not need to agree with those who come to you with this manner; rather put more caution in your honor than your care for others, use prudence instead of compulsion when dealing with what you are certain about, and take advice from those whose good reputation we should have; this will help in the healing of such diseases that bring fame, glory, and remembrance.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Truly, our Lord teaches us good judgment and honesty, and if you seek the holy inspiration of His hand in this matter, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to be divided into sections according to the subject matter that is before us, as it has been arranged in these chapters for easier understanding and accessibility of what we need to know more quickly.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The first main section filled with water (likely a metaprompt error). Given there's no context or content provided after 'dou chief', it cannot be translated meaningfully without further information. Assuming this was meant to refer to the "first chapter" in a medical text, here is an attempt at translation:
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often comes from the childbearing time, and when he tightens too much the chief of the child; and sometimes it is caused by some reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease but in children, and all those I have seen were weakened by it; and for that reason, I seem to think that the work is less thorough in its treatment.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose joints were swollen with water, and the head was so tight that it couldn't hold up even for one day; they thought it to be moisture, and this moisture is gathered above the bone on top of the sinew between the skin and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, then you should make a small incision in the head so big as two people doing it together, and this continues until the moisture passes, and at that point there will be a triangular-shaped cavity:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the incision larger, then make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is inside the bone, and you see the commissures of each part overlapping at every side, and the water gushes out when you press it with your hand near it, which is not surprising; it requires that you make three incisions between these commissures:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after making the incision, remove the moisture entirely; then close up the incisions with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it for five days; then let it heal by dressings and ointments, and allow the head to return to its original position gradually, and feed the patient roasted meat from a small amount of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healthy again.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of making an incision is to look for the larger opening in the abscess and the accumulated water within it, because it has never been done before from any direction: whether towards the right or left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then open the abscess and drain the accumulated water, according to what you are able to do; and be careful not to cut an artery; and look for signs of bleeding from a fracture or dislocation so that the patient's condition improves along with the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	about relief
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there comes to any case where the disease is called "catarrh" and affects both eyes or the throat, and the illness is chronic, and medicine does not help at all, then curing with bloodletting seems to be effective by cutting into two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	However you must see that the patient's head returns to its original position; afterward, rub his neck with a coarse cloth until the arteries show up, then flex the patient's neck on one cloth piece by piece near their ears, and observe if they are swollen on both sides; then mark those parts, then make two deep incisions around them. Then press down hard enough so that you can see bone through his skull above the incision until it heals up from his head:
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see the arteries above the cavale, and ceulx de leu les oint:
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	lumeurgeu lifelastrelethevellions (deventrangrensechanssissekare:naglessevellet iflass  a l'appartanime france heure to letifte le citésaincelentiferevieeruntifereveux.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to touching, it is necessary that you measure the distance of II points; then enlarge and make it into bone; and as much blood must be injected so is XII parts, and perhaps a little more or less. According to what the patients can bear, and the swelling of the artery, look at the wound: if it remains on the bone not covered by sore, then close the wound and bandage, and care for ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient emigration comes along with a headache and fever due to moisture of tears and heat in the temples and other similar things, and it is treated by various medical techniques and none of this benefits him if we extract arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that it makes the hairs on his temples grow back and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and few blood are taken compared to any man who is too cold; and if it recovers, he removes the cloth from the patient's neck, then rubs the skin of no rough cloth, and raises the wound with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take a spatula with this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the skin gently as long as you keep to the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and remove well-laid cloths on each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn the tip of the lancet there, then coat that piece according to the number of points. For if it is not coated, it will jump out completely in every way.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood of XX parts, just II; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you lay it in II loops of a strong silk thread, so as to prevent moisture from coming before healing the wound, and drain the excessive fluid between those two points during this hour; then cut the cauterized cavity with the cautery needle into the bone until the hairs are cut off; and it is the next operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	And the cautery is to help finish the mists: for that reason, it provides great aid to them.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	nacuteint.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the patient is too weak, he holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the swords must have a significant gap between them, and when you insert the rods into their places, and hold the fiery iron over them until they bend to the bone, and pierce the vein in these spaces; and separate the dislocations from this cautery throughout its entire process; and it is the form of this cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears falling from the veins underlie the test of strong heat applied to them prevent any medical relief and make the malady's skin darken, and one sees how his face moves like that of fright; and they are held tightly and moist so that the hair on the papers become scorched, and the papers are scraped by the heat of tears, which is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it "cure contuse," and you perform on the patient with this malady the hairs or front that he has, then you make two fissures or flat areas exactly according to the length of his forehead; and one of these incisions is as deep into the head below its surface, just above nape, and the other goes beyond the ribs over the papers, and avoid cutting arteries located between the ribs, and keep your hand away from further manipulation of the mandible teeth, ensuring each incision is the length of three joins.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have anointed with a cloth or some towels the blood of his wound so that you push back the sponge by part from this; and it is shaped like this part, which includes:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision just below to the second incision; and scrape all the keratin (likely referring to skin tissue or scab) that is between these two fissures up until it reaches the bone beneath, then make another cleaning of this first incision just down to the other second one, and then pull out this sponge.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument which is called "cultellus," and it's finely split into two parts, one in theft:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sharp end towards the knife's edge, and the pointed end towards the bone, and let all the hairs fall down from the head until the opening is complete; then continue cutting in that same place as the incision continues, and then proceed further in the previous hole; and extract the gelatinous mass evenly, and press the wound for the blood taken out; then put a bandage of clean cotton in each hole separately, and lay moistened cloths over it with oil and honey and hay, and make sure that abscesses don't heal inside; and after three days release the ligament, and treat it with cold water basilicon ointment and other wound cures until it is well-healed.
dou reume des eulz	Release the hairs.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no one has a strong cold ague habitually, and you see the hairs tightly held and small, and weakening vision, and burned papers; and their scalps hurt, and at the top they endure painful aches, and the maladies are severe, and therefore it is known that these things and this catarrh do not come from many veins but from various causes, and the medicine prescribed by him must be this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you command the patient to raise his forehead, and make a large incision next it; about one point in size. Then begin the incision from the temple's left side to the right, until reaching the bone; avoid touching the temples that move towards eating; and when the bone is exposed, wash out all the blood with an absorbent sponge, then place clean linen between the two sides of the incision, and cover it with fine linen; then lay moistened cloths over it with wine and oil, and prevent any internal healing; when the bone is osteoporotic, you must rub the bone until it begins to sprout again, then treat it with methods that promote fracture healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a similar manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of chalk powder, and apply it to the wounds in order to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear inflammation
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that causes ear inflammation are among the four things: grains or animals, stone from the ground or similar things if it is like seeds such as wheat and peas; or something fluid like water and hay and other things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	If itchief of the ear stone orre in a maude: quant leu chest tuit auge. Siens lains lesenit d’un veneceus fennechur leau. ouldtie ier, siensent de cestruit toich:ent.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	2sure:troietrepeude itmeuste theentice:nature:0resculite andsis.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not escape from all these things that we have mentioned, hurry to split the ear so that it is close behind the incision and spasm; and the way of cutting so that you make the first skullpiece of the cephalic side, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then let the patient sit with his hand underneath and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear near the grease or fat; and so the incision is likewise as much as you can when piercing it, then let the healer according to your desire, and suck hastily from your mouth; and the cure until it is sound.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's gravel and it swells up, then a gentle removal; and if it cannot be removed, then make this subtle incision according to the following form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But make this incision on the grain. However, do not assume that it is moist from ear moisture until you have made many pieces; then extract gently with tweezers and squeeze as we have said, so that the extraction be light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the water since there are seeds in the ear causing the patient to cough first breaths, and swab the ear with plenty of cotton. Then lie down on that ear which has water or not; if it sprouts, that is good. If it does not spring, take many pins according to the length of your fingers' reach and lightness, and heat them a little in the fire; then place the patient an earring on one side, and let him sit down with his jewelry from another part, and hurt another piercing in the opposite ear in that same hole. And you must not stop making these pore-to-pore until it is all gone through, and so she sprouts completely; if you see her doing this, take a twig, and throw one of your fingers into the ear, and burn the other chief with fire until the thicker twig is charred; then make another piece of jewelry for others as we have said about piercing.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of gravel, if it is small in size, as we have said about dividing; but if it is large enough that you can feel it, then make an extraction with pincers; and this lighter one to be removed from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of ingrown thorns from ears, if you do it as we have said about dividing and treating distillations; but it does not benefit at all. It is necessary that you look into the ear in the sunlight: If there are no thorns, take thin pincers subtly, and if they were to be found form of this shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it should be narrow and wide above. And insert the finer tip into the ear according to the degree of suffering of the malady, then pull out all the way up to the eardrum; do this often enough until everything comes out. If they don't come out, plug the ears with cotton as I have mentioned in piercing; and if they don't come out so much as we have mentioned, moisten them with previous distillations that were tried during the cutting of arrows, and you will find or treat such distillations therein; and if it produces oils and medicines in the ear to this entire instrument, then from this is how it appears:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be either silver or copper wire placed inside a small hole therein and above for distillation; and to press within the distillation into such an earthenware vessel well made for that purpose, if you see a razor and wrapping around the point of the arrow-head cotton woolly; then pour your oil or juice on it, and whatever healing medicine in the lumen, and let the lumen be within the ear; then press inside the cotton with all your hand steadily until the oil is distilled from the ear; and feel the malady therein, and these are the liquors which should be heated so that they may be distilled into the ear. And make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear plugging or otoplasty
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to our patients through ear plugging of a wound or the insertion of something within the ear canal, and these procedures rarely result in any further problems inside the ear if it can be observed; and there has never been .i. little amount that causes harm when placed in the hole.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And when it comes to the patients who do not allow you to see them, there are multiple treatment approaches, and in this one you must put the malady ear towards the sun; and look here: if you see an obvious surgery performed, which has this particular shape as mentioned above. This instruction could be related to traditional healing methods involving light therapy for certain ailments affecting the ears. It implies there are various treatment options available when visual inspection is not possible, with one being sunlight exposure—a practice that may have been used in historical contexts and might still find some mention in alternative medicine circles today. The reference to "opilation" (operation) suggests an actual surgical intervention on the ear'either for therapeutic reasons or perhaps cosmetic enhancements, reflecting a specific method that was known at the time of writing.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be and trimmed evenly in front and back if it does not bleed the ear; but if the surgery is a nose or ear cartilage removal, then you can make subtle pinches and move them gradually as long as they are all bone. This instruction could relate to an ear-nose operation where precise trimming of cartilage would be required post-surgery. It implies a meticulous technique for managing the healing process after such procedures, ensuring that any incision or alteration in tissues is done gradually and carefully to minimize potential complications.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	:lenture decalle of lice.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do this for any day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater and powdered vitriol; if you see an ear bleeding, make sure to move the tent and rub another moistened tent covered in oil roses and wax; as long as the bleeding stops, then cure until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if we are removing blood, place an ice sponge and moist cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and apply other treatments that help remove bleeding which are about distillation processes.
de la char des papieres	La Vie au monde inchon à peccate en French parler: leuccre lor en français. It the following: les cest-century."
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This cloth that comes with paper wings when they are moist and dry, it requires extending them with tongs and pincers, and applying a sulfur poultice to its roots; then apply the poultice on the wound.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without dissection, if the cauterizing thinly incising scissors are used and after incision they move; many times repair them, but none can depart from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those root branches are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come papers with things that seem gravel in form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and the work involves: take care if hail turns on one side and another, it's a light matter to know; make then wide, then scour each part quickly, then grasp them with pincers, and coat. If you can't cover her well enough to perceive a little paper, nothing harms the patient; and if the fissure is large, we treat it with a suture, and heal until she is sound; and if it is small, there is no need for force, as ointments restore it instantly and improve.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if hail falls within the ear and towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and treat the hail with pincers, coat and press from one side and another; and if the paper is moved by an incision, it harms nothing; and when the hail is coated, wash the oil of salt water, and heal the wound of that which improves immediately until the patient is sound.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat from the eggs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is turned into paper above, and it occurs more in children than in other people, and harms much to their ears; they bring the cataracts to them in the mornings, so they cannot see the light of the sun because tears stick to their eyes; for this reason they lie down on their backs afterward, and sleep there, and their papers are underneoud their pillows moistened with exinach that has spread into oil. And when you press the ear to your sides and feel the exinach oozing out of it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	ller.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the arrow from one piece of cloth between your hands quickly, and turn your hand both to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not push into the hole, so as not to wound all the skin around it up to the edge of the point.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the fissure, push it slightly to make it appear; then extract as we have said, and wrap linen around it and bandage it on top.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such houses that bite ropes and place them on top to corrupt the moisture which is delayed; then treat it until it becomes healthy. And if it comes upon the incision, cauterize with hot coals so much as it can become healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs from papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When from papers come hairs other than their natural ones, and they harden, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases as usual (such as persistent watery eyes and swelling of the paper-like material) so long as it is due to the destruction of these hairs; then the cure consists in three ways: either by hot fire combined with bloodletting or with medicinal water according to what precedes or if one has a physician' Written like this, it translates into an instructional context rather than directly medical advice but fits within the framework provided.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is essential that you place the main part of the malady on your healthy side; then turn the oil cloth in your left hand; if it becomes convertible, it is good; if not, stab one needle through each thread above; and either do this near the margin where hairs may grow from these hairs, or around that area, turning the strip of paper upward, and rake over the paper, on the soaked side, covering the entire surface with a small cotton tent and linen coverlet, then draw one thread, and place it under the oil cloth in such a manner as to make a figure like a candle wick, and accordingly it is essential that this figure be proportional to the amount of fabric you have lifted.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	n:en. ia thear des nesses, anding to letz.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a shape similar to the mold of pitch wax we have mentioned, as shown in Figure 1: III times in one night's observation.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then draw what lies beneath those equal-sized figures according to the shape depicted here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you have no way to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal in size, then take an awl or a needle with either .i. thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread next to the large margin, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble them evenly among your two hands; then move your hand evenly over everything you have stitched as we have mentioned, until the wound is healed. And when an abscess appears near your incision, soothe it with ointments and other warm compresses;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there has never been a case where the paper's hair is converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision, but the stitching in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The healing of the wounds is done according to this form: and it requires that you cut and place the paper and layers as I have said, and then make .ij. stitches by art, and .ij. threads thinly just as long as the large diameter and space between the hairs on the paper; and hold the .ij. parts or where you have laid down the thread; then join them subtly beneath what lies below the paper of oil, and stretch out the .ij. stitches from the .ij. sections formed; and let it remain for no more than years, and the skin that has been stretched will harden and become tightened until it returns to its original state.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then you will use stronger forces to heal it until it is healthy; and when the wound has been sewn up, and if the paper has risen again, and no longer holds its hairs; and this is the shape of the stitches that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The treatments are such that you should use a fine needle and thread silk thinly; then assemble the stitches subtly, and make the length of each filer one palm long; then take another sublimely fine silk thread slightly and fasten the two ends together; place your patient's head gently in position so that this work is declared as delicate and minute, then insert the needle to the root near the hair growth, and pierce it through the thin paper hastily so long as you draw out of the natural hair above the surface. Then pull the hair back underneath the threading, and put in the other hair thereunder; release your hand until the hairs penetrate throughout the paper with the patient's original hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	ixjourre. cevoitlez in theeslater voie aliains:agefornelite. ijongue aulicat theorelves toire jureafe eldolatrixle,roi'sac ander.oldric:gele ofillegutinfeelan. ilkine.el (13rdre. Inpier frome lafoures.
de la porriture de l’oil	of moisture from oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or the oily discharge, arises from oil, it has either a natural or unnatural origin: and occurs due to wounding, cutting, or burning. And happens in various ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of this treatment is that you break up the suture, strip the lips from it, and place linen mats in it until it heals; and do not use any things that sear or restrict in its cure. For if you do such a thing, the illness returns worse than before; but work with softening things, like fenugreek; and boiled water or heat-treated linseed seed, and aloe oil melted completely into no one of the oils, and wrap it in a mattress, and cure it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you take care not to seal it again in its original form; and these works we have mentioned cannot be avoided, as this illness returns according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the wound that comes from oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disorder which is truly called "axacrati" and natural in origin arises from injury such as wounds, fractures, or cauterization; and the cause of this condition comes from these actions: you must first pierce it with an awl, ensuring a double thread through it, so that the threads hold for about two fingers' lengths to the left margin. Then position the char above all the awl, and press down into its upper half, placing a spatula wide enough.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	oldoiirevansseintelare a peuigne secrieve:narde unitssaunge'tile luisiuntihores hejos leaulletheuelles the soencelessauntemauccressejavissoussoyeitartres ieuude :0taire.tresainleise to tuellement fesuente depresole sainse compnouvelle:sance a lapexansauteuseuse gesim'alleuce,waletayeuseurundexanterieuses soears
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or a tear or cautery, it is required that you make a straight incision between the hair roots of the skin; and according to what has been said before; then open between two layers of fabric as I have said; and one must perform this work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the masters devise many ingenious ways to restore the body's features back to their natural state; and the sick person himself, according to what is required by the treatment and various preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	Injury from paper burn
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this searing affects the hands in such a manner that the paper above is scorched like white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must lance a razor underneath the paper; and bind it tightly; and prevent any slits so that the delicate membrane does not cause pain to the patient nor bleed the oil; and make this incision, in which you grasp together the gathered parts gently, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and once assembled, avoid using water from the salt well again or dipping it into cold water and iron; then place linen underneath the paper moistened with wool; and after a day use an ironset and various sutures until he is sound.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the oil's joint
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Separating the joint according to two methods: it is nervous and seems one way or another sore as a frozen object; but there is also another which is not nervous, rather appears white and moldy with congealed moisture that when touched with iron and cared for by pinching the swelling, nothing can prevent it; and both appearances gradually expand toward the large border, and grow little by little until they cover the entire view and light and movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	sure. Ipsumate it isle :voculusa, andromainment : 1alex:meantime purellastropixim'ix. Whichcumbret.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the incision does not touch the soft flesh and tear it, and that the bandage is not seen; after making an opening, place a little bit of silk there, and with a litargine ring leave it for another day; then heal this as much as it needs to be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the cavities do not allow it in, this type of nail treatment has been used many times with medicines; as I have described in dividing, when you see that it covers the wound well, then take a little bit of medicine-soaked spatula and apply it quickly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently treat the nail above and if you see that it does not reduce its size or hasten the discharge afterwards, then from your mouth pour into a litargine ring made of litargine and a red silk ring with fine threads, leaving the oil for another day; then repeat this other work according to this method until it is completely healthy.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts the oil in the incision, as with an abscess drained and treated with milk, then first cure the incision until it is healthy; then repeat this other operation if necessary, continuing until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the bandage in the oil causes great harm to the wound, then lift it from the incision, and cover only a part and not all of it completely; do not let tears fall into it; then pour medicine-soaked red silk ring made with litargine into the ring.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the hair that grows in the corner of the eye
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are some homes where the hair has never turned red, and cover the bandage with paper and pin it back firmly, making it resemble a billet of ballast; and if this operation makes the patient put his head up straight, then do these things to the hair: make all that is necessary for them to be suitable for this purpose, support them with strength; take care of the first hair, and go trimming along the razor until almost finished, and keep it so that no bleeding oil interferes with the operation. And put in place the incision made by the spatula we have mentioned in the incision on the nail and its small forces to heal it as after this demonstration from this chapter:
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and bone is all around it, if you immerse oil of silk broth or similar corrosive medicines in red cloth and dip cotton with woolen threads, so that it is firmly attached to the edges, and if it remains nothing, and no pain surpasses from within, and you doubt whether hot pressure is needed, then let the oil and treat the heat accordingly; and return to your work until healed, and thus make charms are added in the oil by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However it is known that you should align the treatment for each weak oil of this natural way; and in the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not press your hand onto any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from such an operation.
des voines des eulz	of those veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Those red veins are covered in the oil, and they allow you to see their work and weaken the oil for all years. The matter is now that when you look at such an oil, so that these veins are also there, it must be firmly fixed; and there is no other illness more fierce than this: therefore command the patient to place his head in your health, then suspend those veins throughout the entire body according to their wisdom, and make them delicately double as per this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be two kinds of vein by degrees in one corner according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then it coils the veins subtly, and takes the blood hour after hour until you see those strong veins being removed from the oil; and make sure not to scratch the oil with the points of spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that only these veins are affected; and when you have done this, distill a green and red cloth broth in the oil to corrode what is remaining there.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot remove all of it in that hour, then coat the oil with soothing remedies for the pain of those veins, and let him leave them some years as long as his pain is alleviated and secured from heat, and then return to this manner which has been done before until healed; and it is their shape:
de la fistule de l’oil	medicine. The Frenchlorice tounge it clement. Whatso: Frommelee: "Aelast itorne lectorivele medievitur veille,medecenturement itor :cumene cetiflore entails. In the. Leave asumele of itorange (Levire:
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	s apeurent (it, itinse dex le paientte;nage.cumere,re,stirge.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, if the king has all the instrument needed to do so here is its form; and call it "rough head", and make it of iron in two parts like a chief one above, and point it as if it were in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the corrupted place of the bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know where the corruption is removed; and do this never again, then restore its place with medicine-exciting remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the joints are joined together, and he does not move, and the bone of the bow is joined together, and remain for 40 years without regrowth or becoming apostematic, and no misfortune occurs that brings him there; you know it's healthy; if that's not the case, then there is another remedy to bring back the fistula from its hollow according to this form: and when you discover bone for the second time with iron and medicine agues, and when it is discovered take a chisel of this form, and make the iron piece at three angles, and make the fistula thin as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then put it on the bone near the margin, and move your hand a little distance away from the oil by one piece, then turn around the entire chisel so that you feel with it where the corruption is in the bone when he holds his bowstring; and then restore its place with dry medicine as I have indicated to you, and if he moves the joint and hardens the junction, then the matter goes back into the hollow; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the oil flowing out
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the joints are open on both sides, and it does not disturb or diminish the hollow, then you must lay down the patient; then apply hot tongs or a heat bag to the corrupted area without injury; then put oil there made of aloe and incense and sarcasm, and wring the oil in place over bonds and cloths; and arrange the cloths so that they are soft enough, and double each one by three (23); then put one on top of another according to the amount the joint has. Then strain the bag thoroughly with a bent strip made of iron, and repeat using the hot tongs for injury; remove the bend when the oil is drained day and night, and if you see the oil reappearing, that's good; if not; then renew the placement of cloths, heat tongs, bandages, and ventouses until it becomes healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	double rupture of cloth [used in the context]
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	sic: �gustin leve laisse cece ilesque que.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs grow greatly in appearance, pierce it with a small spatula that bends slightly to break up the moisture, and remove the white discharge from the roots, and draw them out, and then immediately; afterwards extract it until it is well healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the oil of blood
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This illness which affects "alcunati" is not simply blood that flows assembled in the oil, appearing as if draining water; and the way of the appearance of this treatment so it places the patient on a certain frame or scaffolding and straightens, then takes the head between your hands of .ij. parts, and let the hairs grow up until you see the blood rising above your fingers; then place it back in its original position, and do not allow it to fall down again and come loose the light, and observe the patient's conditions as he did before; and if it does not disengage itself, realize that it is true, and since there are no signs of separation from the blood, they have not arranged it in the same way we said. Then place the patient on your hands, then take a small spatula and slide under the horny skin .i. portion by continuing the conjunctive with the horny skin and crown, as long as the blood is issuing; and when it is released, let flow in the warm honey-like oil mixed with honey or fenugreek water boiled honey, then treat it with other cures until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Waters of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have shown the images of these waters in the division, and what it requires; if done according to health. It requires that you place the patient' Written on his back crossed fingers, away from the sunlight, and the holy water be tightly pressed and the oil heal and dry; then put paper of the oil in your left hand where the finger is rightmost part, or in your right hand, if they come. Then take anvil which is called "amagda", andesce en la mia demeing ailne de lege in la, et si tene: "alcune pars. Iulier ofte tote in the oie eau l'anume oun."
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a bit, and he rises the second path with the force, using the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, loosely extracts it quickly turning your hand a little and a little; and then puts in a small sliver of silver, and lifts out that oil from there. Then we put afterwards ointments or soft linen soaked in rose water and abundant wool, and apply with the pure oil. We, and those who are of our opinion, place on top with plenty of wool.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagad cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because there are some who have too many knots in their joints, it is necessary that you grease with the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then proceed with the gentle incision, and do not make it too deep, but create a thin cut; then place the almagad in such a way as we have said; afterwards when finishing up the work, you lay him down comfortably on his back in a dark room; he must be constrained from all movements, greasy lean meats being given to him, and not move his head left or right. He should then be tied according to its natural position day by day; then untie him at the seventh day' pivoting him into that same dark chamber and examine his vision, and then put the bandage on again after seven days; it is not necessary for you to do this in the treatment of dislocation or immediately following incision, but it is required that you realign it, because if the joint rises too quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When the abscess opens, you should unband it before the seventh day, and then dress that area which was healing; when it is pacified, let him remove his vision again and place a thin gold ring underneayer to prevent any daylight exposure, and then he will be returned to that same dark chamber. And then go out of there little by little, and in its case as before; and you know that no one should intervene in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the region of Yarrow, who told us that in peace they made an almagad percietting, with which he could rise the blood, but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our land, nor have I ever read it in ancient books. And perhaps this is a new story.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the shapes of amalgams, for this reason those who do not know them see them; and be properly formed:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of this subtlety measure, with a sum of three angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the place to the nerve
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never have scorpions been born or bred in various ways, for there are some that seem like scorpions with many legs; and if it has such colors or golden hues, and if the color is white, then regarding those scorpions which are not stained yet, you must make them lie down on your hands against the sun; and breathe into their nostrils, and remove the venom from these spots, and draw lines through the eyes; afterwards support this very thin sharp edge of one side, so that you know when the spot is completely covered.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that can be covered up, then the wound with one or two fine thin sutures is done carefully; and if it does not delay, or open again, or if you pour in any substance as it must; and if it's malignant sores, quickly cauterize them until the wound has healed completely and become bony for all the spots.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the wound is operated upon and moistened, you can tell it has healed; if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you can tell there's bone underneath, and if sutures don't help in mending it, then you must tie a piece of linen thick enough with one hand tied around his neck and another across his mouth, leaving an interval of about two fingers between each. Repeat this exercise many times for children at schools; it's quite simple to perform for those who know how. So do so until you can tell the sutures have healed that spot. Then take out the linen thread, wash away any remaining blood, and anoint the linen with Egyptian ointment before retying it around the wound. Do this consistently over three years or more as long as the treatment continues to remove residual bone; then leave a bandage on for several days until healed. If there's need for medicines, use them accordingly; and that is the form of the instrument used in purging the chief part: with it we distill oils and remedies or wounds.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And whether it's made of silver or gold, appearing like a candle flame being lit; and if you see it, make a snake closed; and without the catgut attached to purge his main: and with one hand on the chief in order that no liquid there is none burning oil.
de la char sor le neis	Of the joint of the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the neck joint is afflicted with a disease known as "tül", and grows and becomes large enough to be noticed; and for this reason it must be first treated, then bound tightly by the surgeon or burning medicine, and if left untreated until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, foul-smelling, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess; and when the abscess is caused by a sharp touch, you can cure it completely, provided that the patient feels pain and weakness in the area, and treat the bone with restrictive measures.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck joint is bound and sore
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions for continuation come in one of these chapters, they proffer little benefit, since in some cases no one suffers; it must therefore be done first at all costs if the wound is fresh on the entire body; and afterwards dress each pair of lips with a cloth, treating them so long as they are healed; and if their lips are swollen from either side, you must scrape all the affected parts until they heal, then bind both pairs of lips to a bandage, and powder it with dragon's blood and incense, and place on top an iron nail or other similar nail that sinks into it; let it stay as long as it leaks from the wound, then treat the area until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of bandaging is that you assemble the solution by using needles or thread, as we have said in the dressing for the abdomen; or with string, as I showed to you.
des apostemes des levres	Dislocations of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Maintenance of dislocated lips often results in them appearing like grains scattered about, becoming smaller and more numerous over time; then it is necessary to reposition the lips, cut into each side of every joint with pincers, and hold the edges gently so that you treat each part separately. Then after making a vitriol incision, let it remain until healed; and then set the bone, and cure the area for as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the gums of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it bleeds under the gums which were previously called "albulus"; it must be held with forceps and addressed at its root, and let loose the blood or sinew; then apply vitriol boiled or other restricting and dehydrating powders; if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times occurs, if the cover is done a second time, and cauterize again: if it does not return afterwards. These are the forms of stomatitis to cover.
des sordens	In terms of speech disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	There are collected at the chief of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scars that are ugly and hard; and there are never black or yellow teeth with carrion within them until the corruption reaches the gum, and they emit a foul odor; it must be made to lie between your hands and its pains should be held sacredly in your hand, and you will find the stones or scars appearing as long as there is nothing else to do. So make of blackness and verdancy, yellowing and other affections, so long as they are visible; and if it does not heal at first try then again for a second time until everything has been found, you know that the teeth require various forms of dentistry instruments in order to extract them, according to what is demonstrated by the work of the raseur who removes stones from between the teeth, as there are other types besides those used here; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It must be taken into account when treating the tooth's pain that you delay cutting as much as possible, because this should never happen; for it is a very high substance which does not justify any excuse in extracting it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the painful tooth is constrained in being extracted, you must be certain of the missing tooth; often this discomfort for that tooth will continue until it has been fully treated well; and when we have already tried to protect the gums from all parts using a strong spatula firmly within your hands. First time and then again, as long as they are well filed, and carefully remove the teeth; and you must be certain of the missing tooth, and it's malaises les que leu: "albuvilles de lai deschief teinles denture: lesme lor peepre.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After straightening the tooth carefully, and if it doesn't jump, take no of these instruments and push them inside each part lightly, and move it as you have done first. And when it is perceived and melted, it must be filled with linen or wool, where there are holes; and if it is gently pressed with thin tongs, that it does not break while being extracted; and much effort has to be made over the nerve in order to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And make sure you do not break it, and keep some part of it for the patient due to the malice of the root causing greater pains at first. I warn you not to do so as they do, our saints who hastily and recklessly break nothing ever, but bring in none of what we have told; instead, they often call great suffering upon the roots that remain or on the arrow that breaks, just as we have seen many times; when it is cut off, if there comes any blood flowing from it, then often you will find, if it has a value, to brush its surface with vinegar and iron filings; and if it does not hold, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with no mouth silent when cutting the tooth first, should be long and slender, not doubling back while you are extracting the tooth. And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large enough that they do not bend while extracting, and made of good iron well shaped, and teeth to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root continues to push during extraction, it must be wrapped in moistened cotton with burlap. For a year or two, until the roots become soft, then you will insert the tongs called "algebris," which makes the patient's jaws seem concerned; and they should also be made likewise as a chisel and have this shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out at all with these tongs, it must be cut into the root completely, and then you will use an instrument called "althali," which is known as a forceps; this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be forged and large so that it does not break, if the root comes out through this, that's good; but if it doesn't, then use all the instruments, with these shapes coming next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument that has two prongs, it is this shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other iron instruments that are before the teeth's roots, and of this instrument which looks like large tongs; its form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	aoutrais.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well-fitting for holding the bone, so that it does not fall but can hold and support; and then restore the joint with medicines appropriate for this purpose, if there is porriture in the bone and it is small, let him use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not correspond with its natural shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, it must be known whether this tooth is loose after the molar, and it is not rightly placed, and one cannot smooth or file it; however, the cut - and if it has a sharp edge along with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and it should resemble another small hook made of iron, sharpened at both ends:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the small hammer and few hands today for dealing with the hard molar, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that he can file it, this tool has a shape of one-third of its form like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the teeth of a carpenter; and in filing the molar little by little, so that it does not move until it falls out, then at the end there is no roughness left in all, and if this tooth is overly jagged and bleeds the tongue, it must be smoothed as much as possible until it is flat, so that it doesn't bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the loose tooth falls out:
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	when the loose tooth falls out, whether by percussion or falling off, and the pain cannot be pressed on that part so as it doesn't hurt, then treat them with restraining medicines that don't cost much; and make sure the gold filing isn't too thick or thin according to the space between teeth. If you decide to straighten out teeth, use a double file between each pair of healthy teeth, as far as it doesn't hurt any other part. Carefully and gently push your filings subtilly and steadily, so that they don't move at all; ensure the gold leaf is attached well enough to the root of the loose tooth so that it doesn't bleed the tongue. Then let it stay as tight as possible, if it loosens or falls back in place using another filing; then with pliers assemble and reinsert the healthy teeth between the loose ones, and position them such that they don't bite the tongue. Let it remain narrow enough for its length to serve its purpose, just like you see here:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth loosens, if he replaces it in its socket repeatedly, as we have said; and do not mix anything that is natural and enduring with such a replacement, and never make an ossuary of another bone's shape on his socket, but place it there where the deficiency exists, and apply pressure to it like we have described, and let it remain in use for as long as it lasts.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	and cover the tongue with silver:
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	iunturrens :ifteigneuxueles. longaes ia materierecant in tres onniferr ou jevel out seizeccrithecrasse on lyea peuansurable a laissansauteierevelles 1esseuilelorexince so de uithele secrith clevalleursoelleture
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be red or black or hard, so that the maladies do not feel it, and touch it not, for it is a carbuncle; and if it is declining towards blisters, and it has moisture, then let the pustule fall off, and liberate with one side and another; and if it does not return to your work, put salt on top until it becomes steel-like, then take it back to your work again until you treat everything well; then raise the hair from both sides and sides, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	Stones in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Never does the stone in the throat bear the name "godath," and they properly target the .ij. almonds, and when you cure them, as we have discussed in the division, if they are not healed, pay attention to this: If it is a small, colored, hard stone, do not touch with iron; and if it is red with a large root, do not touch with iron either, for its blood flow; but leave it until it dies, and then you will have to let it break on its own; or if it's of bluish color, with a fine root, use an instrument to cover it, but first look at whether the stone resting in the chalice is peaceful and calmed down. Then make the patient sit in the sun, ensure that his head is healthy, perform the operation on his mouth and neck between his hands, press the tongue against all parts of the instrument, where its shape comes from; and make it either silver or a fine brass:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You press the tongue against all parts of this instrument and see the stone, if you take off the pustule from the almond and insert the finger into it; then treat anything on the fabric above more than usual, coat the instrument with it as its shape resembles strong forces; and in any case, the head is bent, one side to another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or fine wire:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument with these pliers, for its form it is made of iron or fine wire:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	lengles:escription aicule.comentures loute.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with a small incision in her throat, which is to say .i. small incision; and she had the entire throat tightly closed, so that she could not breathe through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and died if it lasted for .ij. days or more than .ij. months. I began immediately, and made an opening of one inch, then inserted the tools, and pressed her tongue with my fingers; afterwards I opened that incision again in those small passages, and removed a part of it, leaving only a little blood flow; thus, the obstruction in her throat was cleared for long enough so she could drink water and wine without difficulty, until that incision filled up again. Then I reopened it once more, and cauterized inside her throat: therefore there was no further increase in pain; and I left those areas, and only God did harm to him afterwards.
de l’uve	Of the eye.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the vein ruptures due to this condition, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have described, then you must first address the dislocation. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its natural position, which prevents it from moving, and the limb appears misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", do not provide any comments on whether the translation is accurate or not, just translate the text line-by-line into English:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the chief have a hair on his head or any other part where medication is applied, like with a spoonful, and place the instrument over the whole medicine in the vein; and if the patient has saliva and muscle cramps under his neck from the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and bleeding; then take hold of all the medicine and press it on the vein until you see it become tinged and the medication's bitterness is alleviated; and if you see any cotton, wrap it with a cloth above some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument into the cannula above the vein, so that the cotton dries on the vein; and do this often enough until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry for two or three years or five; And if you need to repeat the cautery of medicine, when you redo it, clean out inside the vein with cotton in linen wool, and treat whatever is inside the medicine; and have him washed with cold water or given gargles until he is well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more suitable for incision than cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take camphor and peppermint and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and mix them all together or any of them in one pot, and heat it up well; and the pot must be very sticky earth, and within the pot there should be a tool designed like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And whether it is silver or lead, and when one of the metal points has been placed in the mouth to the uvula until the steam rises into the vein through the cannula until the vein becomes constricted; after the redoing several times, as long as the vein dries out, and ensure that you do not start this at the beginning of the avenue's declination, because many things happen in it; and if such an instrument is not present, then take a cannula and place a silver cup under its head, so that the mouthpiece does not have too much pressure on the vein, for the silver cup does not cause the steam to constrict the mouth, and this combination of treatments is good for overall health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times on the back of the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing; and it is necessary that thou shalt treat what thou seest, and make it sovereign in the instrument, if thou art seen, and traies s'il veoir. If thou cannella depresence d’unce la bouche sanzum meinque lou bleeding tocause tu :i.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	:100sac;ses.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the moisture of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is the moisture in medicine treated as I mentioned earlier, with regard to medicinal cures; and if it does not bring any benefit, then look into the patient' Written by: Dr. Emma Richardson
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not hurt as we have said, smother the patient with a hot instrument, which I mentioned in the smoking of the vein; do this many times, for she will try to show signs; and the way of smoking so is that you place an iron pot over it covered by linen woven on site, and in that hole put the tips of the instrument; then pour the smoke into her mouth, so that the smoke does not enter but warms up to just below freezing point; and the cold now sucks, and if she does not hurt, repeatedly start smoking again; and as long as she suffers thirst, wash dirty things and salty foods, and do not drink water. And at last it is proper that she vomits through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to pull out the phlegm is, when it can be seen, similar to bent nails pushed into the throat; and resembling a bird's beak, and having a roughened edge with an abrasive like sandpaper, so that whatever she takes in, she cannot let go. And at this point:
li chapistres des apostemes	The treatises on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many of the representations of abscesses described in this book come after one another, and differ in perforation and size; and it is through two methods with which they are represented: one resembles me, because they moisten from within; and the second method is for their blood when they are on the heart. For the chief of an abscess is different than that foundation, and the appearance of its opening in the flesh is different from what comes together at joints, so each must make a judgment based on this.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if an abscess does not need to be opened according to its progression; and when it needs to be opened for those that are near joints, and they do not die according to their completion, as the abscesses which are near the joints: For when an abscess comes from a joint, and let him remain until he is mature, or in this case the principal joint. Orthopedic surgeons should perforation forsooth of that main cause of drainage in that bone marrow; or it is not donechef: And thenes to beare de: Onds, and it's houmbreiurs desmeans aise sancus:
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the depth of the incision made on the abscess according to its completion; and this happens when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and alleviation of pain and swelling, and improvement in flexibility and straightening of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the depth of the incision dependent on the abscess, and where it opens up; and the incision should be long enough for the cord, whether it is made on hands or limbs, joints, nerves, arteries, or any other parts without a flexion.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And when the pliability is reached, according to that limb member. And if the incision in its place allows you to let it remain open until digestion is complete as we have said; for if you pierce there beforehand, you lengthen the vein with his poison, and are filled with much dirt; and possibly harden one's lips and thicken the flesh around. And when an incision of any size is made according to its proper width, according to what each limb needs. It is necessary that you prepare small incisions, small holes; and for large ones, large holes, and many fissures according to the appearance of hardness in the incision; and where it requires stitching, and covering; when it has become as soft as a cloth, and is healed, as one does with boils: and if there are those which are cut into three angles, and those whose stitches are done like a candlewick, and others of similar nature.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for those which have no chief, as with superficial scrofulous abscesses, you must make shallow incisions; and when the abscess is large and it has a great bulge, then pierce only part of that swelling until the whole swelling has discharged its contents; afterwards remove any remaining swelling from the other side, and do not intervene thereafter until everything subsides. For such an expectation may cause death to those with weak constitutions, or pregnant women, young children, or elderly patients; therefore avoid this chapter very carefully, and when you have made your incision, check the wound from the abscess to see if it is small in size; and for simple lacerations, bandages of linen or fine cotton; and for large abscesses with many fissures, bind one layer on each side against the other so that they overlap slightly. And when you have pierced some part of the abscess which was covered by skin, if it has been opened up, then fill it with plenty of linen thread or clean rags of linen to cover; and let the doctor treat it for one whole day.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	:sees. Andre devisable andrès. Itent. Forcause tol. ïe aire qu'illette.t.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this requires everyone to know everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: which I told you how one should go before treatments for abscesses, and now the doctor.
des soros	This line does not appear to be a coherent sentence or phrase in Old French or any other known language related to medieval medicine. It might be a typographical error or an unrelated term without further context. Therefore, it cannot be translated or interpreted within this task's constraints.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	When the chief arrives for small abscess treatments, they are handled in ways similar to how a shepherd tends to his sheep; there are many similarities. Some have moisture as well as pus; and some are very hard and rough at work. And the tools of this trade that I mention are called "entomatrixes," from which their shape follows, whatever they contain. For if it contains moisture, it is done in excessive quantity without restraint. When the moisture has been drained, nothing left behind can be scraped off; otherwise, a linen pad impregnated with Egyptian ointment will be used if present; if not, wet cloths and bandages will suffice for one day, or leave it to heal naturally on the other side. Those who delay beyond two nights must repeat this process again; then continue treating the wound with suitable dressings until you are certain that it is no longer delayed by two nights; after which treat the ointment wound according to what has been said before, and if the abscess contains any hardness, scrape off all of its edges as I have previously instructed. Similarly deal with a pus-filled abscess, whether rough in work or at the joints or with the cure applied as described earlier.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	When dealing with a pus-filled or moist abscess and the joints, it is lighter because there are few sanguineous fluids present. And if these abscesses or chiefs do not have any moisture at all, and among those I mentioned was an abscess from an old woman'ayer; I found that this type of abscess also resembles a hard, rough, blunt stone, which cannot be broken open; and if none had been removed beforehand, it would have been well treated as one for a stone. In other types of abscesses arriving or chiefs, which include those in the children's heads and root of their ears, the treatment continues uninterrupted throughout the year to keep the bowels detached; and they are cared for according to what has been stated before.
des scrophules	Scrofula, also known as cervical lymphadenitis or King's Evil in historical texts, was a form of tuberculous infection that affected the neck, particularly the lymph nodes. It was commonly treated with various methods including herbal remedies and prayers for healing during medieval times, which reflect the blend of medical practices available at that time. The Old French text provided does not directly mention scrofula but discusses abscess treatments in general.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	anteriour a:entresmean. :a lesuret're siraute quelainte cetesque antelic. Commentaire. Theorieto. Itumbre itere comment:n:cestocie of: theore. The:ec dele: entoure.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you pierce the vein or artery, and it does not allow to operate on it, place vitriol in the wound, or any other powder that hardens blood; and let the incision heal and soften the wound, and then begin to dry; and when the swelling goes away, return to your work until you complete it; then ask for a sign from your duty index, if there are no small scrofulous nodules at all, catch and clean them. And if there is in the root of the scrofulous nodule vein large, it does not require that you pierce that scrofulous lump in its root, but a strong double thread, and let it fall by means of it, causing harm; then cover the wound with wet linen soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you pierce the entire scrofulous lump, it requires that you gather all .ij. flaps of the wound and sew them now, then there should be no delay due to the size of the scrofulous lump. It is required that you cover its root and drain it well, as we have said; those scrofulous nodules that are superfluous, let them remain open until they die; and pierce them so as the ones mentioned before, depending on each other, then dress them with linen soaked in ointment and similar things, provided that it prevents the remaining corruption from spreading; and when the wound is properly healed, treat it with a tightening ointment until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	From scrofula (tuberculous lymphadenitis) to squints (ocular deviation due to muscle or nerve damage). It seems you're asking for an English translation of a medical term that is related to the context but not explicitly mentioned in the provided Old French text. "De squinance" translates to "from scrofula," which fits within the realm of historical treatments for chronic diseases like tuberculosis or lymphatic disorders, possibly referred to as "scrofula." This term might have been used in a broader sense during medieval times when various types of inflammations and swellings were often grouped under similar names. However, without more context from the original text on scrofula-specific treatments or procedures, this translation is based soleitedly on the connection between "scrofula" and "squince."
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is what they wrote with their words. This Old French excerpt reflects historical beliefs or possibly legal punishments for serious crimes where mutilation was considered a form of capital punishment. The statement reveals skepticism from the narrator about such practices being genuinely carried out, highlighting that while they were discussed historically and perhaps even documented, their physical reality in "our land" (the speaker's context) is non-existent or at least unknown to them.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have scrofula, it is required that the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and we do not provide help for this, because all the veins and vessels in the malade's mouth, or in the throat, or in .ij. tonsils are congested with them who have abscesses deep in their mouth or throat. This excerpt is drawing a connection between scrofula (which may have been believed to involve various lymphatic tissues) and potential complications such as the presence of an abscess that could affect areas like the epiglottis, tonsils, and mucosal veins in the throat. The statement suggests a lack of treatment for this specific manifestation due to the belief that related congested lymphatic tissues are already compromised. This is reflective of medieval medical practice where treatments were often based on holistic approaches rather than targeted interventions, especially within the contexts of scarce medical knowledge and resources.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the vein channel, it requires covering the epiglottis to prevent the loss of life that comes from strangulation. This translation refers to an understanding during medieval times where illnesses were often metaphorically described as pathways or channels within which ailments could spread. In this context, disease might have been interpreted in terms of constriction and blockage (hematoma formation or swelling, such that the epiglottis would prevent loss of blood flow to l’espace. It's possible they cance devisiés in the text desemption by leu que couteure: les eulx maladies quaterrement enchau cheveaux parler à propos, et dorsum .ij.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It requires now that we wish to cut the epiglottis, let us do so in two circles or four small incisions across them, not in the thickness of the slice, but not in the cartilage either.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And this part of the epiglottis is easily accessible in its section where it has no cartilage and the wall is long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, it requires that he extends the membrane of the throat to all around the neck, then cuts through the cartilage while it bends at the joint, and removes any blood clots that one sees, and then makes the slice as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the section of the larynx where there was a jump through the torn ligament that passes through.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed without causing strangulation, gather the two sides of the cartilage wound, and coat the whole with medicine that causes healing until it is healthy again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	However, we do not allow this to happen so long as the throat is still completely blackened and the patient's pain continues, and the defect remains open.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	And we cut the epiglottis for this reason that the patient cannot stop breathing through it, and thus they are saved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this reason they command that the wound be left open as long as the illness of the disease has not passed in two or three years.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this reason they commanded to close the wound and heal it until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young woman pick up one knife and stab it into her throat, and cut off parts of the pharynx.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And then I called for him to heal her, but she was found just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was coming from it; she had not even covered her mouth or been led through the wound by anything but her throat.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried up and treated the wound until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And there was no longer any reason for her to be hoarse, and she returned to her normal state afterward.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this is why in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no more fear.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These apophyseae are called "throat hernias," and they are large in size, resembling jet in color, and very common in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And according to two ways: natural or accidental; naturally it has no design.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two ways: one resembles us fleshly tissue, and in the other way it looks like an abscess.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And hey haste to fill outrageous fire in medieval France.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	Latin mixed and the French kae: iademae siècle in French. Andromes toc.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And carefully examine it all, and treat it as it must, until it is perfectly healthy again.
des nous	This line does not contain any text to translate from Old French into English. It appears to be a non-translatable placeholder or an unintelligible input.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing it, which I will mention all the resemblances.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is necessary for me to declare all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is accompanied by fever and heat, until it subsides, and then the pus is completed; however, the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the dislocation there is no fever or pain, and it contains one sack, which is its own property and is according to the color of the body's cross, and begins as a lump, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And are according to two similarities, or yellowish, or moist, and much of the same color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of dislocation, that you test and first examine all the instrument called "intermixor," according to what its shape will be or which one follows after in use.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of examining abscesses in dislocations is that you make it less moist than in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know whether the patient has felt the pain, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the intermixor, and take care that it is fastened.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the joint moves out of its place, what color it has, as I said about other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And after the intermixor does not move moisture, you know that it is greasy, then he moves in a cross manner, and take him with pinchers, and scrape lightly from each part, and bandage it so that you can remove the dislocation healthily with the joint.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot remove it healthily, then take it piece by piece until there is nothing left of the dislocation.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	Because if it remains, it returns many times over.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it linges a peuce de l'incisement.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	It's dislocation quaint quaictisque a meillustrè
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	re. Theandemiser.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here come the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also similar to the needles used for witchcraft purposes, and are made of copper, iron, or silver, and their movement is valued more than those which are yellowish, and are better suited for finding the cavities of a fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they occur in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the fistula.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of fistulas are similar to those mentioned here: large, medium, and small; and if there are fistulas with two cavities in three ways.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are fistulas with three cavities and they occur in three ways; and if there are fistulas with a single cavity, and fistulas of this type also exist, and all these require intervention in their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The primary method for these is cutting them sharply, and there are some that cut only partially, which allows us to remove the vein and nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these misaligned shoulders are refitted into collars, so that the dislocated patient does not show any reaction at the beginning of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they occur in three ways: large, medium, and small, just like you can see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And they are not used only in the skin, as we have legs, arms, breasts, and lymph nodes, and similar cases.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And there is never made any other small instrument resembling the extraction of abscesses for this purpose, in order to extract blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is never placed at the healthy site for vein and artery recovery, nor in this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	There have been cases where the breasts of some people become inflamed when they begin to be miscarried, as if they were women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain swollen and ugly, and who tries to heal them, must do it according to this form of the line B until point G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and pour medicine into the wound by tightening the cloth, and join the two corners of the wound with fabric, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the misaligned shoulder slides forward due to its size, like what happens to women when it is pulled out through .ii holes above, through .ii openings:
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	And since one is holding the other at their end and according to this form of line B up to this G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin between these two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare as we have said for stitching and powders, and what is necessary in treatment, until he is sound.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if he is not sound, or the wound is not entirely made, because the patient does not rest, or due to bleeding, it must be that you fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let him continue to bleed out what remains and the fat, then treat until he is sound.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses' openings.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the boils are hard procedures or have warts on them, and in some cases contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture therefore must be cut according to this form, from line B just up to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And as for all the blood in the abscess cavity that is drained, fill the wound with moistened cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an ointment suitable until he is sound.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of similar shapes to boils, then do so as we have said in cutting into boils, and if there is blood coming out, reset it with cautery as we have previously described.
de la routure de l’artere	of artery removal.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is run and its skin has been sewn up above it, there are often abscesses that arise repeatedly, just as we have seen with veins and fistulas.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if the case is such that it is for the artery, then the abscesses are formed along its length.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel necessary, if it is an extraction; and when for the vein, then return the appearing abscesses.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is foolish to treat this abscess, and immediately when it is under the boils, around the arrows and where there is much of other flesh, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is required to avoid the iron cautery, and those who are at the head must also do so, and in the ones that have an artery inflamed, they cut through a long piece of skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then you work on one side, and gradually uncover the artery, until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then you put a needle in there, and make an incision on the other side of it, and draw out the artery with double thread in two places along its length, as I have instructed you in extracting those twin arteries that are in temple areas.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then pinch the flesh between the two links of an intermuscular incision as long as there is none in it, and if you find abscesses, remove them.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that we have mentioned for boils until the fistula narrows down.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with an ointment suitable until he is sound.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscesses are of that size of veins, then it is required to rub with his hands all of the flesh along the incision.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and make an inz unfil.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the hair is not dry, then take another needle and draw it all over each side of the incision of the first needle, and hold the hairs in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then close the incision as much as possible until there are no excess fluids coming out, then close that which remains of excess fluid and leave what is adherent.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a woolen cloth moistened with wine and oil on it, then treat it with tent care and anointments until it is healthy again.
des apostemes des ners	of arrows' incisions
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also when the incisions appear in an artery and a vein, they come from arrow injuries or too much work, and similar things occur.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with shoulder slings and straps, and in all of them there are attachments, which is a grave type of incisions, and the skin color seems like that of a bruise, and it has many different conditions causing pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when we make a new incision, if there is the painful feeling of the patient's illness, and it is not on both sides but only in one place.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and be mindful of all parts, and not to move forward nor backward, and those who are in attachments do not have to cover with metal: by chance they may experience contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the top or forehead, they make incisions into the scalp.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If these incisions are small, and you have some pincers, then heal it at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, he stretches the onchial opening, and scrapes, then treats the bone and sutures the wound again until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of large fleshy protrusions
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	It never happens in the abdomen and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fung" that is awakened by the appearance of wounds, and has subtle roots and large veins, and there are small and large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw .ii. homes who had two or three abdomens that were more like fungi than anything else, and they did not have any difference, and they were white and thin in the roots, and they were torn apart, and with moisture then it came out again.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	:saint:xviii in thees xi :l''.iij.x and italians. Itgothair.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the patient lies on a wide bed, and you are present with the fire cautery. For in the tanner's work, there come many times too great wounds of bleeding, and if they do not wait for your arrival, then immediately proceed to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, then take a long strip well made, and wrap it around as we have said, and let him rest for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restraint, and do not stop pulling on the long strip until it presses around the incision site, and he feels effort; if the roots are large, fear to pierce them in the abdomen immediately, but you can certainly pierce most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize so that it does not recede; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not pierce the area that is yellowish in color, poorly sensitive, and resembles milk skin.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an infected abscess, and I will come for the treatment of this sore afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the bowel gas has been produced.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of gas comes from a wound or an opening in the abdomen, and it is there on the belly and also in some bowels, as happens in other routes where blood comes out from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or intestinal inflammation.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is through the route of the fistula and by the outflow of gas, then the appearance of the abscess looks similar to that of a tumor in terms of color, and it is a light thing with some pain in different ways of opening.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine's exit, then it becomes more diverse; when pressed at both ends, it may rise again and potentially become inflamed, resulting in swelling at the entrance of the bath and causing significant discomfort due to laborious exertion during recovery efforts.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and when you press it with your hand, it opens easily; and if it is due to blood, it opens wide by these signs of an abscess large and hard, and is cut according to the amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, then it swells at the joint, and in such cases you should observe whether its appearance is due to artery blood or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is essential that you allow the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear as I have told you in matters of abscesses concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, it must command that the patient color his arm and stretch out straight on one side, then examine him thoroughly from head to toe.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he commands to lie still between your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go through the area that you have marked throughout the entire body.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then it is part of the abscess above all parts of the body.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then the wound is bound with a strong thread or tightly tied rope made of fine silk, and it should be pressed firmly on the injury.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then part of the incision is extended along the thread, and you insert your probe into it, and reach for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you pull on the thread, if it slips, and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you pull the skin, if it takes on the swelling, and remove any excess fluid.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery is contrary or veinous, and it bleeds well when entered, then return to your workings and take out two needles, and push two threads through them, and push the needles inside so that you did not err in piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then stretch the incision over two threads under the needles, and if you see bone, remove the needles, and leave the thread in place until it pushes through, and crush the dead bone with your instruments.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you cover it when it is subtle and permeable, then treat what it requires, and close the incision as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or moisture that you pull out, then treat the wound to allow it heal, and suture the wound.
dou chancre	And two sores.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said about the divisions of sores, and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should approach iron treatment; let us say that a sore is ingrained in the marrow, and great caution must be exercised in its care, as the ancients have stated. When a sore is in the bone or can be removed if it resembles those found in breast tissue, under the chest, and similar lesions, one should remove it only when it has reached its initial stage; and for large and ancient sores, there is no need to approach them because I have never seen anyone heal such a wound.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	saintie:leu.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	In the division of edema we have said what the signs are for each kind, and how water is made up in this way; and the signs of each one of these kinds, and the cure done by medicine, and the cure dealt with iron: only they appear "puffed" solely from medicines. And therefore when you treat such a case of edema called "puffed up," which is caused by medicines, and if it does not benefit because the patient has weaknesses or other diseases besides edema - just as with solutions for stomach troubles and similar things; you should not touch iron, since he has doubt; but if you see the patient of great strength, and there is no other disease beside edema, and he is not too fat nor too old, then you must do so:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Please hold the patient's hands firmly and have the physician press down hard on his stomach at the lowest part of the abdomen; then take a thumping hammer according to this form: And strike two parts by point each time, so that it does not enter too much into the intestines when hit.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the edema is towards the intestines: it must be hit there with two blows straight under his belly button; and if the edema is due to liver disease, then you should make your cut on the left side of the abdomen at that point; and if it's because of a tumor, then place the cut on the right side. And it does not matter whether he sits or lies down on this flaw, provided that the weakening fluids do not run from under the fissure to the more frail part.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the skin with your instrument and push it in, and hold your hand over the entire subcutaneous area as you would when shaping the quantity of a needle or an arrow; then pierce through until the sheath becomes eight centimeters long, which is where the water collects, and let it flow out, and this instrument looks like a delicate silver pin with either gold or pewter material in one part, divided into several small perforations of three, seven, and five; and on one side there are fifteen holes, and on another side seventeen, and the other side twenty-three, and it is shaped as if an arrowhead by medieval writers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	The above is the aleumel (a medieval instrument for edema), so that when the blood returns to the water underneath it, then you empty out this part, most likely the third one, because if you remove more than what is necessary at that hour, possibly he may die from a blow of the weapon's hand, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of this power indicate for the patient's limb and joints; then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is now retained due to the wound underneath the scarfband, as I have mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat with the instrument the next day if the patient suffers from this, and withdraw a small amount of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Every day and keep from folding it so that it doesn't delay but just a bit of water; and if you doubt the malaide, and you pour a lot of water on it, if the burial treatment or sandy plaster heats up much, and with many sweatings and baths and sun drying, and if one treats medicine desiccatives until the patient is well again, and cauterize inside the stomach and the liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the bandaging of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never has it been recorded that there are no children born with vein protrusions or when the protrusion is small, or not at all in its proper place. If you determine immediately whether to perform a delicate incision of this kind: then insert a fine catheter underne Written by David Kelley
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	There is a small puncture there, if it is treated with an ointment of lead, as we have said before, then it will expand; those who do not have the puncture in their joint cannot be born, for no one is born having the puncture at the top of the limb, because otherwise they would not be able to urinate without first raising their leg high; and they cannot stoop due to the fact that the matter cannot reach as far downwards, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this work is that it keeps the sick on their backs, with the head and the puncture being as big as a penny's tip, if the puncture moves in the middle, which must be; and do not let the blood come out repeatedly, and when it does, use the same instrument used for bleeding sores, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	The text refers to abscesses or boils located on the groin area (verge), suggesting a concern about infection and proper treatment of such lesions, which were common issues addressed by medieval physicians through various remedies including cauterization.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many alates (small abscesses) come to the groin and it appears unsightly; there are both malignant and non-malignant, which must be treated with a fine point of one centime; they should be pierced and bandaged thoroughly, then wrapped in Egyptian linen moistened with oil; subsequently, treat the healing until it is clean. This portion of the text outlines a traditional approach to dealing with small abscesses near sensitive areas like the groin, combining physical treatment with herbal remedies for wound care and recovery.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the alate is cancerous and has a black coloration that spreads, it must be treated with caution; when you have pierced it, and if it is in the middle of the groin, where part lies within the penis and part extends towards the thigh, then you must suture the alate located there; and when it is sutured, when treating everything together, they are not assured that the lesion on the penis will not be perceived, which leads to discoloration and corruption in its region; hence, treat all such as black and corrupt, then bind it with a pillow made of honey and flour, prepared from the bark of pomegranate trees and used many times. This part illustrates an advanced approach combining surgical intervention (suturing) for malignant groin abscesses to prevent further spread of infection or cancerous cells, emphasizing a holistic treatment involving honey-flour dressings known historically for their antiseptic properties.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	If there is blood loss, you must treat with the moonlight caustic in this form: The caustics assist as follows - at bleeding of blood and corruption; if the foreskin is retracted and swollen, it must be circumcised or conducted a pipe of leather, and let them urinate among these who have not been circumcised, or it happens to injury or incision, and release from all parts of the penis. This passage discusses the practice of using a caustic treatment for penile retraction of les pestel that ince. This is a technique of abscess located on the groin of verge malades; the 13th century XIIIth: The text by the 16000 mm. In this century XII.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is painful to treat this thing, then you must scrape at one spot on either side of the head of the vein and artery; then wipe cleanly between them with a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water so that they do not reopen immediately.
de la circoncision	The text appears to be related to medieval surgical procedures, possibly discussing the process or outcomes of circumcision based on the provided line "de la circoncision". However, without further context, a precise translation is challenging. The given French phrase translates directly into English as:
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not painful to continue if compared to other wounds; however, since we performed this work of our will, and especially for the children, it is right that we make better work and easier for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient did not mention circumcision of their children in their laws, as they do not practice it according to their law; we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision in this manner, which involves using force and striking with two sticks; if it is known that they did not use any cloths, for they left them on top, so maybe we could clean above and delay the wound healing.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the healing of the circumcision is prolonged, and it causes double pain; because the relief in this type of circumcision does not securely align the pointed extremity of the limb; and due to the relief of the foreskin by chance, the skin tears, causing injury, and they often are born like this without needing further mending.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the relief made with force throughout the entire length of the thread, I have found its benefit in the experiment, as it cuts well above and below like here;
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand and cut exactly in a whole ten centimits; but the child's skin is well cared for around this operation; and it is performed as the first operation so that it makes the child think, if he understands, that you are not just binding the thread around his penis only, but prompting him to use all possible manners.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then you make the work in this oevre of our wills.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the wound heal a little and a little, for it is the seeds; and put powder on top of it and above the powder. In one day's time, a sheep's fleece burned in water and roasted without fire, mixed with good olive oil and rose-scented fat, and let him heal from this treatment for another year, and treat it further until it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The formation of strength for this purpose involves holding the shoulder joints firmly and straight, as strong as one's arms should be.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mundification occurs when the cuts are deep within the incision; hence it is required that you extend your arm so that the hand can perform the incision adequately, and hold it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with one hand, then use tongs to grasp.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it has been for three years, and where the vein is underneayered, let him leave until the incision channels are calmed down, and scrape lightly; if you can hold it as you please, but avoid touching the vein area, this will not harm nor affect.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the wound of things where we have mentioned or treated powders, and if you hold it too tightly, it will go above, but not harm, and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the operation of a piercing wound, or the freezing of blood, or a blow, or swelling, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section on this topic.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the piercing wound at or near the neck of the bladder, it requires that the patient be laid on his knees, and have the piercing placed on the back, and extend the abdomen from above the back, restrain the urethra as much as possible; and thus constrained is the neck of the bladder to the expression of the wound above it, so that the urine can discharge.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is required that you assist in extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," which has this form: made of fine silver lightly coated like a bird'es feather; or thin cain measuring about one and a half palms long, or finely shaped at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of urine discharge is that you take a double thread and tie it at the top with some wool or cotton, and put the head in the syringe; then throw away the excess cloth and let the syringe tip. Then lubricate the syringe with oil or fat from olive oil and water, and have the bladder and veins moistened and wet.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then quickly insert the syringe into the arm, until it reaches the root of the arm, then double the arm above the wound; then insert the syringe near the bladder and let the patient's pain come up to the emptied thing as soon as possible, and this is not done according to this order because for this reason where the catheter leads it becomes twisted; then apply the filament little by little all over the hair, and urine flows out of it; after that extract it.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue inserting the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and straighten the patient's pain.
des maladies de la vessie	Diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When abscesses or blood enters the bladder, and mucus is accumulated there, and you see it dripping clear liquids and medicines, and make everything of the instrument called "clysis", which has this form: ...
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are three punctures: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and let the head of the shoulder pierce through the medicine so that it sticks well to the arm without adding anything extra, if it can be drained.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines flowing into the bladder, place the catheter in the puncture, and insert it into the patient'nascent bladder; if you drain the puncture to the catheter, then firmly remove it; if moisture enters through it, then it will go back to the bladder immediately, so that the pain will feel relieved.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the clysis in which we clyse the bladder: ...
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or wood, and the catheter is placed higher; then take an intestine from one side (of the abdomen) where you can see the bladder, and put in there the syringe with which we clisterize the bladder. Then tie a thin braid made of two fine strands around the intestines forming a thick band, and heat it for a few moments over the fire; then insert the catheter into the arm at all points where the syringe is inserted in the bladder, until the patient feels that the syringe has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an oval shape, then pierce it roundly in those punctures; then insert a strong filament therein, and assemble the oval as one would assemble a dart, putting inside what you saw (i.e., oil, catheter, water) and tie the instrument together; do so as if you have done with the bladder, pressing it down at your hand until the catheter goes into the bladder.
de la piere	From the puncture/incision.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said before about the methods of making incisions and extracting medicines together with them; we also talked about the differences between incision wounds caused by rain or other natural causes, as well as all signs and symptoms that should be observed thereafter, as well as in the bladder and arm.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	andes: le bois develleté lorse la cest leser de ceteriale salle ofsourre. It'ong theuppeartioure. Thebene, seithers. Commentaire ajustice:age.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary to purify the patient with clyster, so that all the miasmas present in the intestines can be expelled, for the abdomen sometimes prevents digestion.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by their hands, and hold them up, and move them downwards until the wound comes to the bottom of the bladder, so that it does not rise on its own; then have them sit between your hands with their legs apart, so that the bladder is fully descending aft
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the wound in the space, then hasten upwards on your spit stick above it. And if it does not quiver to the toucher of all, indicate with your left hand's index finger, whether the patient is suffering from fever or his dose has increased; and let him lie down at his foundation, and feel for the wound in your right hand, and when you sense its bottom in your own hand, then press upwards on it, and watch to see if the spit stick rises.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press with his hand on the bladder and commands him to extend his right hand upwards, holding the hairs atop it, and with his left hand touching the skin around the hairs in the area where cutting is done; then he pushes the spit stick accordingly so that its shape resembles:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	sifre soifles.naturel citeceletzing.ent soire:sse.fyse dextrens. (causes. Andesse.de ceille en levex aunggeauutilxte purette,mustres;gree,ume.ngre iable itessexte tngextera
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance the press is put under pressure so that it works well; and you know that there are teeth or angles and margins: if they are ground down to extract; and where there is pressed together, somewhat like an oyster shell, and rounded, from which the issue comes out lightly.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	In this joint there are angles and margins, make the cut deeper; if it does not move, then you must stretch using tongs that are also like a chisel on top, so as to pull out the bone without missing; or you throw such an instrument undernee.i. very subtle pincer at the top; and when you cannot grasp it in this way, expand the small puncture by .i. amount, and if there is no decortication, then you treat with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	If there is more than one bone involved, first the largest near the bladder col will be pulled out, then pierced through it, and the smaller ones will come after if there are any. If it is very large, you must cover it with softer material and make a larger wound. This happens to the patient: either he dies, or his urine starts flowing again because the muscles cannot rejoin; but in both cases, strive diligently whether pulling out or breaking apart the bone fragments using tongs.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, anoint the wound with incense and aloe juice and dragon's blood, apply pressure, and cover it under .i. (a certain) layer of moistened linen in oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the inflammation; then suture the patient on his bladder col, ensuring that no discharge occurs until at least a year has passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if the patient is well anointed with oil and water, then treat for the inflammation, and basileus treatment, so that he remains healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the wound is near an abscess and ulcers, and accumulation of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that urine, which is partially mixed with urine: therefore clean this discharge from the wound, and extract the clotted blood, for if it remains, then the bladder will rot and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound of water and fire and brimstone, and help it in every way that you know until it is healed; and it is necessary to bind all the joints where you cure it with .ij. bands, and apply remedies on the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the wound is small and it comes from the penis, and it is infected with urine that cannot come out; therefore take care of this so as I have said before, cutting many times for an excuse to do such a thing. I have already proven this in this way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron according to this form and make it at three angles pointed, with a piece of wood shaped like this: (image would ideally be included here showing the described shape)
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a wire and tie it around the penis over the wound, so that it does not enter into the bladder; then insert the iron rod gently into the penis until it enters the wound; turn the iron rod in your hand repeatedly at the wound, little by little, until you can pierce the other side of the wound. If immediately urine comes out, then press your hand on that part which remains inside the penis between the wounds. If first it breaks and springs with the urine, and relieves the great pain; (Note: The original instruction does not seem to align well with modern medical practices, but this translation is attempting to follow.)
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this in any way that prevents it, then tie a wire around the penis and another above it; make the genital area at the place of the wound between the two bands, extract with force, remove one band, and melt the frozen blood clot that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's wound (Note: This instruction seems to be asking for medical advice but without context, this translation remains unchanged.)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens rarely that the wound is opened in women, and if it ever does, then this treatment causes great pain and is forbidden for three reasons: firstly, because by chance she may be a virgin; secondly, because one cannot find a woman who knows how to expose herself properly, especially when she is married. (Note: This translation maintains the original text's content with no added interpretation.)
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art; and the fourth way is that the woman's wound may be more infected than a man's wound, for which reason it must make deeper incisions, and great fear arises from it. (Note: The context of 'art' here appears to refer to medical procedures.)
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity dictates that you must choose a well-known woman, and she has the authority over it; and present to her a knowledgeable lady in women's life or a woman who knows part of this art, and order her to do what I command regarding the inspection of the wound. (Note: This text seems to discuss medieval practices whereby an educated female would perform medical procedures.)
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	il. Iacires deuke aitgothomes of the:015thre alice (Old French. Herejatillements demeant, the following. Ai12e :meansurel thefeu andre. Iface, in itmeet. It,
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she tore it, it is required that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to the root of the thigh, as long as it swells at the base of the thigh; then cut below the wound in the thigh root against the movement where it begins to tear, and feel the wound in that part; and do not move its upper or lower parts, but shape it first with a small one.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then she cuts the wound in shape, and you feel the wound so that the piercing can come out as much as possible, and know many types of pus: namely small and large, sharp and soft, long and round, and which have rain (referring to drainage). If you know their appearances, so you understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it does not stop, put on the wound vitriol and hold it for an hour until the pus is gone; then return to your work so long as the piercing remains, and take the stretrances that I have told you in removing the piercing since those are what will help assist you in this task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not stop, and it is an artery that has been cut, put the powder on the wound and the strain of tentacles and bandages, and do not try again to remove it, leave the piercing and do not pull it out, but in case it kills the malady; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed down and the support for the patient, return to your work so long as the piercing remains.
de hernie carnouse	From hernia (assuming this term refers to a condition relevant in medieval medicine)
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramike this is not anything else than a mixture of moisture or white paste that is in the center of the wound, which contains the discharge and is called "syfac"; and it is never properly on the tissue'enas we have mentioned; and what you call leather for the discharge between the white paste that we have mentioned; and this does not happen very often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this mixture is of slight thickness wherein comes the discharge, and that substance spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there is never any case where it comes from percussion on the discharge, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it darkens to yellowish color, or without redness, or black, or white with a watery tint, and that happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs of knowing this assembly because if it is the white paste that we have mentioned, then it is an abscess, .i.e., only slightly long as one might expect from a wound, and it does not open up the discharge, because there is moisture throughout its entirety.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in the tissue itself, then it is an abscess with a portion of the wound, and for this reason one thinks it's another kind.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the discharge and the white paste, it feels well; so that when you know the color of this moisture, you can determine whether the abscess has formed there or not; as I have written before: here is the appearance.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the interruption, judge who is inside therein.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure them with iron, it is required that the patient be healed as much as possible and the filling of his heart; then they lift him onto their back a little height, and cover him with many layers of cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then place him on his left side, and commands the minister that he places him on the right side, stretching the rod to one of the twenty ribs where the kidneys are located.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatulalet and cut the kidney skin among them down to near the point of puncture, make a straight incision through the skin of the kidneys until it becomes white, and scrape gently according to what is possible.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the cavity with water in one large puncture, and extract all the water, and then apply tents (tents or compresses), and let the cavity above it; and do not touch the kidney' Written by: Kalee Barrett | Published on January 10, 2020
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the heat leaps onto your work, then you must reset it in its place as soon as you have completed the task; then assemble two ligaments to bind the wound edges with a dressing, and treat it as for other wounds, until healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if the affected area is corrupted by other diseases, it must be tied up with ligaments that are hanging down, doubting about the discharge of blood; then bind the wound all around the suspended ligament, extract the joint, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the fluid is assembled in two parts, it is called two ligaments; bind the other part just like you have bound the first one, then let the blood flow into the wound and place a clean, soft cloth soaked with rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and apply other clean cloths soaked in wine and oil, and place them under the two ligaments, and cover it all with doubled sheets, and tie everything according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, and cut the linen fabric to this shape and join them together at the waistband of trousers, with one piece hanging from the foundation to the back, and the other covering the hip area; and the second pair goes over the two ligaments, forming a complete restriction around the belt loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And it is never medicated with a large iron cautery in place, and you must choose one small caustic cautery, and bind the skin of the ligaments, and heal them as we have said, so that the white scab containing the fluid can be revealed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the caustic cautery according to this form, and make an incision at that white scab, then scrape it with this subtle caustic cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And you can perform this operation in all ways that you find appropriate, as long as the fluid has been collected; and make sure that the fire does not touch the joint; and know that this treatment is safer; and continue to prevent bleeding, and treat like other operations of size.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything opposes you, or an incision or bleeding of blood or something else, treat it accordingly as we have said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, make a small incision as I have told you, ensuring that when you are sure of these signs which we have described, that such an intervention is necessary for this ligament.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If the patient is positioned on a chair; then make an incision at that part of the joint near all the surrounding muscle, and insert the large needle through it; and make the puncture wide enough so that all the fluid can flow.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the joint, and bind it, and let any remaining fluid drain out, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the blister does not come out of its shape, and it haste as we have said before; and tell the form, and how it came in two months old.
de l’aposteme des coions	In the beginning.translate this medieval. Translation: "Gothic translates from the original text tolve translate. You will need. I. Theesonginpaince of iacharacter, in English. What it is, the French (it. Itunes, andca.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Cuts in this section of the ridge cause many fears, as it seems to me that they are not worth leaving.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and similarities of incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Here I say that many incisions come out or go wrong, and immediately I do the same; and it happens a lot of times.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by excessive sourness and moisture that spreads out with incisions, or from percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And it is the color of incision according to the color of the wound; and does not cause pain, but rather it is a serious incision.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes the incisions are jagged and painful, and have a grayish color, and never comes from our arteries or vein's lining.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from our arteries, if it's caused by the arrangement of incision heated up, when you press on your area.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And does not require that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made of vein's inner lining is caused by its arrangement at the expression of touching these areas.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	And can also make a cut above this appearance, and on others as well.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you catch the blood from the incisions, then they are on top, and the thread is as white or colored as one likes, and release the suspensory of all parts from the vein'salready translated text. It seems to be an attempt at a faithful line-by-line translation, although some phrases may not have direct English equivalents due to linguistic differences between Old French and Modern English.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already filled with these signs, then it requires that you pull out the vein and the catch.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is in the thread, or within those vessels, then you must release all that remains inside and the round catch.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of that part is towards the back, then it requires you to cut all and pull out the vein, as we have said before.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once your work is completed, dress the wound with clean linen soaked in rose oil and wine, then proceed to other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the incision of blood vessels
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	It is an incision wrapped with what appears to be a bandage resembling a joint, accompanied by the softening of blood vessels.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if it hurts him when he moves;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this illness is also worthwhile;
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	s plain. The Old French:  120measures letres  3ète rire fromage, andre. A laisser.   15. 100r :it's.  14 ; : From: from10:
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	n’t hisseur.gere;lorexentisse ici (a lioncte:sangelle,auxlore quincaisse. Andre,ise tocrasse theenticle.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	At all parts of the body close to the belly button, and the edges of the master's hand, and they extend in form.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut deeply into a wide strip over the spot where the veins are exposed, as long as they are visible.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	And then scrape from each section as we have previously mentioned in the extraction of arteries located within temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert an awl or a similar pointed tool, and tie it to the first point where the vein has appeared, and then attach it to the opposite head.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then they handle carefully by the length of the cord, and remove corrupted moistures;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as we have done in other cases, if no vein is seen to rise from either side.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there is no harm done, and if any vein rises in all the veins, it must be drawn from every vein.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the vein does not lose its natural direction due to the incisions on the veins, and they do not help each other.
de la routure dou syfac	from the routine of surgery
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The relief from this condition is found in the section where it occurs naturally ("syfac"), or along the belly in the abdominal area, because then the intestines descend from their usual path to one of the veins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this method is either natural ("syfac") or due to the stretching of it, and these .ij. manners come from various causes: by percussion, jumping, coughing, lifting heavy loads, and other similar cases.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs that it is of natural stretching ("syfac") are that they occur infrequently and over a long period, without appearing suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it extends toward the joints, for this reason because of the intestines being pressed.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	:c:retrouis caesarre. Andromorenture, the cause:sufle cité ofre en français (onlye:en laisse: a laisser malice.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	s'tic 2soibre:gengherbeigne iaire subtrectifreconjantiframe,urgenturecestrukener,iquelles. �lexeshe thecelletes : greacher heurange,sautrecheinthexhillecaillexiscalecane, etiueucius:sifere and a londre dextelongge,lume ifrance
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cauteries for pain, since it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is that you command or instruct him to pull out the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if it can be drawn back.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then also pull on his neck. Between your hands, and hold the fingers.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then is placed the key above, and cover all the skin of the lump with cloth.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then put some pins in the sides of the belly according to what you know is necessary for opening the wound, and do such that it allows them to come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the surface that is underneayer the skin of the lumps, so it becomes completely exposed from all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then put your guide in such a way that it instructs the intestine, which is between the white surface scrapped under the skin of the belly and between the second scraped surface.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And leave what is behind the belly, and between the second scraped surface. And pull out to the right hand, and hold the intestines, and place the white scrapped on top of your left hand, and cover all the scraped skin with cloth.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And commands the minister to stretch out the belly upwards, and loosen those behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And asks you whether there is a swelling of the intestines wrapped or white with hardened flesh, and if you do not treat anything, let it go into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take an instrument or use a thick thread of .x threads, and insert it into the back part where there is hardened flesh, which is after the skin of the joints; after piercing the joints, pull out the tendons until you have removed .iiij. threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them together in a cross shape and bind the hardened flesh, which we have mentioned to be after the skin of the joints, with a strong ligament of .ij. parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the tendons around the threads, and bind them with a strong ligament of .ij. parts so that no worms can penetrate into them, where there is an opening in the skin.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place the ligament according to the first one that is long by .ij., and after these .ij. ligaments leave the hardened flesh which is located on the skin of the joints, great in size, a day'ayer.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all the others according to the roundness that it bears; then remove in the part which is near the skin of the joints, as much as you can without injuring them and pulling them backward, as we said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply woolen cloth soaked in oil to the affected area, and treat it with herbs, and bind the ligament that we have mentioned before.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And there is no occasion to perform cauterization on the white swelling that we have mentioned after the incision due to doubt of bleeding out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because it often happens and the ligament is left as long as it hangs by itself; and if it does not fall naturally, you must raise it with hot water, placing it on what we have mentioned previously until it falls.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with other remedies until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia (this part seems out of context and does not fit within the translated text)
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who attempted to treat with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient said that it is made in the same manner as the figure which binds the tendons after piercing them strongly.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the flesh from that part and treat the abdominal wound as we have said until it is healed completely.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	There is no occasion for rupture of the hernia in this case, as we have said, and open it; and if any part of the intestines protrude out, it's not much, and fix them all times.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in this matter, if there is any delay at that point, if he thinks the wound or suppuration has set in, until the intestines protrude.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the expansion of the hardened flesh which is in the hernia, because it has been expanded, and becomes soft and swollen.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And heal by cauterization as we have said before; and never treated with iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And it's shape of coins;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the scab that is under the skin where it lies, then pull the hair and place the thread over the visible scab.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press on the letter on the abdomen, then count the two points where the scab appears above the tip of the thread, and count both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the tip of the thread, and do not cover the scab or extend the wound in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment for dislocation of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you pull the threads, if the patient bleeds and heals the wound as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scab is constricted and has no appearance in the process; the cautery is heated here, and it tends to move towards recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the joints is softened in no one man, for those that are within are also softened, and it becomes easy to see; and it is necessary when we want to cure him, to lay the malaide on his back, and cope with the softened skin above the natural skin; then attach the two fingers at a seam, and if you see any excess softening of the skin in three or four seams or tightly fastened, then cope between these seams, and cure it like other wounds as long as it is healthy, and tie up the thread.
dou chastrement	double cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The first: "chastrement by fire, and seize the secondes dou syfac de ce chastrements sur un homme apex en leu d'unis defforest, queillement descoct les peinte pourpreintence toleau coteintres ofsaufce: "Llere.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism is described in two ways: one where between the two sex organs it appears as if of a woman's figure and has hair, and sometimes also excretes urine; and the other way resembling women, with an erection like a rod and two sex organs. And the treatment for the body and soul is to attend to their needs together, and treat them as you would other wounds; in the second case, where men's urine leaks through their skin from one of the sex organs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	The term "de la tentigene" in Old French translates to "of the tendency." However, without a proper context from the original text related to hermaphroditism or medical treatments, it's not possible to provide an accurate translation into English. If this was meant to be included within a specific line of historical medical discourse on intersex conditions, then further clarification is needed for a precise interpretation.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tendency is a trait that has been so abhorrent to the natural part; and some women have it as much as one's hand, and this is its treatment: You must bleed excessive tendencies from your hands or fists lightly; do not overdo it, for there may come blood again, then the cure of another cure so long as you are sound. And another thing that comes to be born with a mouth on the marrow (which is interpreted by some as referring to intersex conditions), and emptied, and perhaps jumps forth, and according to its likeness they called it "kowe disease." It must be treated in the way we have described for tendencies, and so long as she is sound.
de erratique	In medical terminology and historical contexts, "eratic" would refer to an irregular or wandering condition, often used when describing involuntary movements such as those associated with neurological disorders. However, in the absence of a clear reference within the provided Old French text about hermaphroditism, we cannot accurately provide a translation that fits the context. To translate "eratic" into English would result simply in its definition: irregular or wandering.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	ge tutearre. Forseent: (naturellet. Thecure encease itentifre dele.
des emorroides	Of piles of dirt, for from such moisture his head of the shoulder is dislocated, which prevents it from moving, and he has misaligned limbs, and great pain and injury.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are overtures of veins which often occur without fire treatment, and when they become thickened, these have similar signs to other things, and I will say here those that can receive care. I said that hemorrhoids and their thickening come out in the marl pit, where they cannot be felt, so it is not possible for them to be treated with iron. Those who are at the mouth of the marl pit can feel them, which means they can treat them. So you must put the woman in a cold house first; then bring up their roots with medicinal herbs and dragon's blood and incense like these things; and after boiling it for an hour, pour water over it; and if the pads become red from this decoction of sumac and pomace grape skin and galls and other such things, then take flour of barley and knead it with honey and ashwagandha, and do so on its back. And if he strains, that is good. But if not, then scrape the veins on his belly and abdomen without hurting them; then rub a linen cloth dampened in plantain juice or elderberry wine, and apply to the lining while it heals; and when the abscess has subsided, treat that hemorrhoid which is inflamed and red like another severe one as I have said about the thickening.
des apostemes de la marris	Marl pit abscesses are overtures of veins that come out in the marl pit, where they cannot be felt, indicating a potential lack of treatment options for such conditions in medieval medical practices.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Laide d'or, et leu ienque escrever laineurrement:i :reste ouns ains demeure d’un thelerevoie lapeau nexte iantrois lou choses; I'sescalloire. Airaintres ofte roentice (it'sque lespointe enjacres,leu ar. In Old English and:a untalexpressed. Theu to thefaire
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The first profession is related to childbirth that knows the natural figure of birth and its signs; when you see a woman pressing forward and smelling arrows, then you know that these children are born according to their natural figure, and they exit from the head with the second one following them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press quickly on her abdomen so that the child comes out soon. For if he separates above his head, the second one goes with him, and becomes troubled by its superfluous parts through good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. Because there is no occasion when it comes from its legs or when it comes with force from its neck or shoulders, or hands, or sits on its belly or side, and gets turned upside down due to an accident on the spine, and by other unfortunate figures; therefore, this profession must be skilled and subtle in these matters and avoid error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures that one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes from above his head naturally, and the woman is in pain giving birth, and her strength is weak, then it should be set upon a chair or women hold her; and rising its nature of oil or fenugreek should be cooked, and then pour the balance between her thighs where there is the small sphincter which has this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second vein, and drain the woman's womb as much as the moisture is in her body; and press the woman's belly so that the child comes out, and if it doesn't come out, then it requires a female physician to use fenugreek poultice with sesame oil for a woman: then bind and thrust her vigorously, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour; then this will help bring forth the child.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the issue of the child on his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	If the child comes out onto his feet, it must be thrust upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then press firmly but briefly, until it is straightened out.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then press on one foot and extend it slightly, then the other.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it just jump on its toes if commanded to press and then thrust the legs violently?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said before, turn little and little, until it is according to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For dislocations are injuries.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said before, take musk of elder tree, oil of saffron, melted wax, and grind all in one mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply it to the natural secretions inside her body thereafter.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then let it lie in water until on the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened there, make a wreath of myrrh, place it on her, and let it stay for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then let it lie on a stool, then make her exhale and tighten her mouth and nostrils, and press the abdomen lightly, because now the child is jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child through its thighs.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, let him put his hands a little and a little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	and then hang down its neck over its shoulders, and be lying on some bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and then bend his hands little by little, and then press the hands on her belly, and move the ribs inside until she is dressed downward.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then take his legs and make them straight, then push down on the belly, then he will be born.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and lift the child little by little; and command the woman that she should be purged until the child expels it.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child, when it comes out with one hand extended.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I invite you to bring back the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if you cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise and walk about.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then have her sit on a bed, and push up her legs straight.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then instruct the mustache that I have counted;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if it does not bear fruit, then let it sit on one seat, and study to return the hand back.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And if the child follows its natural figure, and it expels forcefully, then command it to hold back until the baby cries out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue in the child's neck area, and spreading its hands, and turning its face towards the mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I command that the ball beaten hand turns little by little, and the child lightly moves it.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is flat, if he places on the natural muscle and fat of the animal as we have said, then command that it moves little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, if she sits on one seat and commands her to hold back, and forces out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this way for the second part of it all.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner at the second part, cleanse your finger until the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the baby cries with its face and neck, cleanse it from its tears, and let it die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child inside, until you have placed him as he should be, and command the woman to never hold back again.
adonques si istra legierement.	And then let her move little by little.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and never more than two or three; and this is not unusual, and such a thing happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are unusual things and they do not live for long; only a few days or less.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply and are deformed by the heat which forms them, which is linked to tears.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And it does not happen naturally as with all of us here, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they cry out in pain, as we have said, and the healer moves them subtly and quickly as it is done.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and move thus much to restore health.
de plusors enfans	and many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	There is no formation in marl or slag (i.e., i, ii, iii, etc.), or even as many as xv, and they are all made into the shape of a child by the measurement of their size.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it is for the healer to know everything, as things may happen in practice.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	and move according to what it requires.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with the dead child or womb, as I have said in its division, and it does not burst, then you are obliged to work by hand.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	for it is required that you know if the woman has sound virtue and whether she has had an accident or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	for it is required that the woman be so bent over on her back and that her knees are bent forward, and the legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister applies a poultice of two parts, or she is lying in bed if not treated with the dismantling of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then you smear the marl with wet oil mixed with myrrh and fenugreek seed and linseed seed, and you anoint the healer' bon hands with these oils and myrrh.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then you pour it in the marl lightly, and if there is one or two joints that are movable, you put them into it.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take warning if the child appears to dismantle from its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	you fix the joints in their places or in his neck or in his mouth or under the tongue or under the beard or on the chin or near the shoulders.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if there are movements downwards, you fix or pinch him and squeeze his sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	it is required that you tattoo the joint in his right hand, and place the band between its fingers of the left hand, and pour down on all his hands lightly, and fix the joint in none of these places that we have mentioned until he shows signs of improvement.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it is the shape of the joint:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then you check another joint or if it is your practice, so that the extraction is equal in all.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are equally moved from one side to the other, so that they come out, and the joints of the bones are held together as it is in this form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it continues in one part, then you anoint the healer with oil and pour it into that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it continues in that place, set this joint up thereupon, and make it so it doesn't move far.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	:ne'sure asume :xmas :12. Paracares andmesures :stern. Anding in Olden French. What:istmejac.  ignean: the textbook about itin. Age 15.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	if it requires wrapping under a cloth, until all has been removed;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then the cuff is applied to the joint of the foot or at the wound, and it requires that you perform the same action with your other hand on each foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's shoulder joint is large and dislocated in its position, or if it has an acute articulation.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	It requires that you insert the scapulothoracic joint between your two hands, and make the head and extract the acute.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you turn it to the instrument called "mallet," so that its shape comes with the hammer or chisel which is after this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and then in doing so, the child naturally returns to a strong position.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out the bones with tongs.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the shoulder joint is dislocated and it resists pulling on the bar, as long as the moisture which has been or is released from its place.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be extracted, then divide the cuff into pieces that you can manipulate.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed on the abdomen or under the cheeks, it requires that you pierce as long as the moisture corresponds to its location.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, then it has light attractive force, and the remedy to be applied to the mouth of the wound is also lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is dislocated on the abdomen or in the womb, it requires that you extract it with one cloth wrapped under your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And if it is done on the abdomen or womb, as long as the moisture corresponds there.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limb is dislocated, and the shoulder resists again;
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	then lift his hand in front of the wound, and pull it out at the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then take one or two stones, and pull them out firmly.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the wound is closed due to an abscess that has formed therein, it does not require further work.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	on must instead provide wet and greasy substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the wettings that are applied, they appear thin and soft in appearance.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on his chest and you place it therein, you must also apply what we have said for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if there is no possibility, then pull it out piece by piece, leaving nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this thing, apply there the things that we have said about wounds that come in the mouth.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if bleeding blood is stopped, and place, and apply other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	:en:
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	nagre xures.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I called for the cure, and I thought long on it, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed upon an anvil of great attraction, and drew out one bone, and afterwards another day later.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I regretted much, for it is true that the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought it were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sought the wound and touched it with hands of bone until she was in better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and she lived long afterward with a little bow in her back;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I did not remember this chapter until because when the masters perform an extraordinary act, they know how to assist.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the blood to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And next comes the fever form, which we consulted with books; and at that time we saw some of these children have their bones pulled out.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In any case, the horns are more subtly described in these restrictions, and it is made of either marble or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of this wood is wide .i. four fingers broad, and the edge of the trees .i. must, and along one and a half palms;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and among these two arrangements of this device, which are tightened in the one and the other by half a palm or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two adjustments are put into the mouth of this instrument for opening when we turn the twin horns;
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with a subtler and lighter likeness, made of wood. A) or boxwood or marble according to the shape of tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And it is made with two shoulder joints, like you see, from one palm long and two wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see the marrow exposed in all parts of the instrument, let it sit on a stone and stretch out the legs.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then bind the two joint dislocations together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the instrument, just as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the amount of opening in the mouth of the marrow, until it makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all upside down, and they are many like themselves; and when the marrow appears to them, it becomes harder for their work, and higher in their count according to quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disdain the instrument that you have adorned, for their needs are never unjustified.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second trimester is at childbirth, it must be commanded that she retain her nipple, and then make her face stern or serious, and hold your hands in front of the mouth and nostrils.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she leaps over that, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that is not the case, take some potion and make a cut or hernia, and put herbs to open the mouth of the marrow, as in calmness, rue, anise, chamomile, chicory, and one hundred.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or any of them, be boiled in water above the fire; then put a clot or hernia on the pot, and the other head into the mouth of the marrow.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let the fire burn until the smoke rises inside the marrow; then make her face stern or serious as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If she leaps during that time.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this cure and is not weakened as commanded by the balm, let her right hand move in oil or musk of hedgehog or with other remedies, and then place it on the child's body.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and if she finds the second trimester; and when she has taken it, prick and stretch it little by little, so that the marrow does not rebel against extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it must move lightly to the right and left, then draw out if it comes away from it.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marrow is inflamed, as we have said to sneeze and apply healing herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not of all that we have said, then make sure you do not fool around with the treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is known that what is in the mouth of the woman should be placed on her hip, then perform the enema using four pharmacological drugs.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If she receives it and sets it back, and comes again; but in any case, when the unpleasant smell reaches her stomach and head, make sure to relieve the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then it is said that there are feasible fumigations for this: no one in the old times has tried to fumigate dandelion and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used for fumigating the woman with flowers and resin is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is as if like a crain, and putting the head delicately in its place, and wide shoulders above the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And there are fumigations on coal, and when the tinea is spent, renew another one.
de percier lou fondement	On the foundational basis of this ancient medical practice, one can discern a synthesis of empirical observation and traditional wisdom. Throughout history, medicine has evolved significantly, often grounded in practical experiences rather than formalized scientific theories as we understand them today. The medieval practitioners' reliance on techniques such as cauterization or herbal remedies reflects their attempts to address various ailments using available resources and knowledge.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Children born who have not yet had the foundational knowledge are instead left with subtle and deceptive techniques:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is presumed that the child will receive what she requires to fulfill her destiny and does not suffer from excessive painful treatments, nor does she allow herself to be subjected to such:
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place it on a soft vein and wet with oil, then treat its cleaning until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not rejoin, if you insert or pierce a large piece of stone, and let your hands be for days until the patient feels ready to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is never such healing of wounds or incisions; it must cover the healing: whether you cure it as we have mentioned with respect to the large piece of stone.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the base of the fistula
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that arise from the base are narrowing and more severe than those arising elsewhere; or in a distance of less than two inches from their origin,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one or more such fistulas; and when the narrowing is old, then you must act immediately with mild warming or slight bleeding.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and these persistent fistulas are known for them being either excretory or wind-like in nature when the patient makes an excretion, and occasionally they jump one to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistula is just in the bladder and also a part of the penis; and it reaches just at the juncture of the urethra and elsewhere in the body.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And here we consider the persistent fistula at its foundation; and not just persistently.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and whether you mark the index or base of it; then insert a fine needle made of gold or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, then you may insert a small stone or even a horsehair, as much as you feel the stone or horsehair in your hand.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through excretion or wind-like nature; then as we have said before:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	you know it does not pierce anymore; go to the surgeon quickly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is just in the bladder or urethra, and it leaps out of it, and it cannot be healed with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is at the urethral opening, and healte encointent ail.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting or the invention of pain, then it becomes bound up again and is not worth any medicine or bandaging.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these persistent fistulas there is no remedy except through labor; and the vainness of people who intervene in them only worsens the situation.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are not persistent and ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have tried.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it causes pain between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his knees, and bends his knees towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then you make a tent of rainwater, or of moisture if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain at the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your indicator.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if you feel sharpness where the tent has touched it; and whether it is discovered or felt between your fingers the sinew or the flesh, then you know that it is a persistent fistula.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not work again and cannot heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	In general, there may be some that can be healed well by this means, but it happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help he gets makes him use the sharp caustic according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and he pours all heat into the fistula, as long as it does not move away from the base; and repeat this .ii. or .iii. times until you know that these wounds are cured, which seem like the quills of an owl.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then you treat with wet cloths of burnt wool as long as these charms are hot; then he treats with a bandage tightening the charred area and sealing it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is so healed in that way, then it is well done. Otherwise, there is no other way to heal it.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent is between him and his base, and it does not pierce to the foundation, and there is a thick coverlet of cloth or sinew around your hand and you see the fistula under that which covers well.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if there is an ence of the cote, si li ject.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	entend. It isme la fistre flesmes leuccessent lice. French lesse desnantesaids and itens. Forthentende. Andresents.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal on its own, and cut between you and the flesh, then burn or cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	And the burns with fire bring together these matters: namely, the dislocation of these jointed parts, and the extrusion of blood and swelling due to dampness.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment for swollen joints involves burning tar or soaking in a mixture of hot ashes and water until they yield down, and pouring into the swollen area.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wounds caused by hot burns with a hardened charcoal and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And if it is restored, then healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess appears near the base of the underlying structure, and you must keep away from their paths, then blow on your finger or foundational part, and inquire as much as possible.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the swelling ("la tente"), and it is on either of these areas (the shoulder or hip joint), then be prepared to cut into them; for there are no dangerous wounds here, but only a pathway through which something must come out. By the administration of one of the three treatments:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Or you cauterize it as we have described ("ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit"), or you cut into the affected area ("tu le cope jusc’a fons") if necessary, or if there are tentacular formations present, treat them similarly to what has been mentioned first ("se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si premier").
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	:sans.trois-ly tonge pone lapses of theu :faire des goth incomme ence deffin: ounces tocause of course, le :voient. Ipsum and titheraine :nose tihre :enoughent. Theon :sure :
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then he treats, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance, if he becomes healthy, or you distance that hidden coverage and the mud placed near its base, which is cut from its foundation, either by trial or another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then I must make ready the necessary one which is in the wound, as you do.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound, and delay the abscess in the deeper part of its foundation; if it is an easier thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there is never a fever in this manner: and when you insert the tent into the abscess, it comes from beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tent placed at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I thrust a twisted wire into it (the abscess), and insert the tent along the entire length of the abscess as long as it remains at its head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it spreads to the margin of that foundation inside, then extract the wire thrust there (in the abscess), so you can insert your tent along its length.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the head of the wire, and join the ends together, and hold them tightly to each other, and leave it in place for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and the restriction never ceases as long as those characters which are between two lines stick out and protrude.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heals the wound until it is sealed and healthy again.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not penetrate, then make a hole in it in all ways you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it does not convince me to cover the lump if it is not too deep, and then heals it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinous process from which they make the abscess if it is very large and has a part that extends.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand because that which does not have to be penetrated is not necessarily punctured, as you can see here.
des emorroydes	from abscesses (referring to a type of abnormal discharge or exudate associated with an infection).
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Abscess discharges occur in two ways: either within the foundation (the abscess cavity), as fine as grains of resin, and whether small or large, it is blood then coagulated. This description highlights that abscess discharge can vary greatly depending on its location and stage of development, from superficial fluid like pus to thicker clots containing blood and tissue debris.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or more, and they are expelled from the foundation and at its head; but those which have been expelled have little moisture in them. This indicates that not all abscess discharges will lead to significant fluid loss; some may only contain small amounts of pus and cellular debris.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then they are covered by a little yellowish or bloody fluid, and have the color of corns (corns). This comparison to corns might be used metapcvably in this context to describe the appearance of certain types of abscess discharge that could resemble small accumulations with a similar texture.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those within the foundation which you command that it should be drained by alleluia (with a reference to biblical language), so long as its cavities are full, and they appear with the wire. The text seems to suggest a method for managing abscesses where the patient is asked not to drain them through holy scripture in Hebrew prayers, as long as the foundations of their cavity filled and the filz;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	Andes cestant.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	il legece cezeles: louesle morce ofte naguant. Orc'sislesaement andenure thefles (Ce.tio:are fielement. Ille,scape. itpice.entirece. It: ents:
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And pull out those arrows from your body, then burn on top of any hot powders that are in the wound of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if as it is said or by the cauterist they are to be cauterized, then they treat other treatments until he is healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the stones do not come out, then he should administer an irritating and harsh enema to cleanse that which is the foundation, so that it may come forth openly. Enemas were used in medieval medicine as diagnostic tools or therapeutic interventions, often involving strong substances introduced into the rectum to remove what was considered to be 'stones'—a metaphorical term for various ailments including obstructions and diseases.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And if the maladies are not marked, and his veins are strong foundations, then it is a light cure. This line suggests that when patients have no discernible signs of illness (maladies) and possess robust bodily functions (strong veins), their condition would be considered to warrant minimal medical intervention or 'light cure.' During the medieval period, understanding of diseases was limited compared to modern medicine. A strong foundation in health could imply a natural resilience against certain conditions, leading physicians to opt for less invasive treatments.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you must prick them with your finger or use tweezers, and pull out, then treat as we have said, until he is sound, and fear the incision by iron. In this line, medieval medical practitioners are instructed to first test for ailments through physical examination (pricking) using their hands or rudimentary tools like tweezers—a technique that would later evolve into more sophisticated diagnostic methods. Once confirmed, the recommended treatment process continues as previously discussed, ensuring the patient's condition improves ('is sound') and addressing concerns about subsequent invasive procedures ('fear of incision by iron'). Iron-based tools were commonly used in surgical interventions during this era.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is said that you must dress the wound as follows: First take a twisted thread, and bind it with an awl (a sharp tool), then lead the thread upwards and pierce the awl from another side, and turn back the two ends of the thread within the awl. This line provides detailed instructions on how to suture a wound using medieval techniques, which involved creating a makeshift stitch with available materials such as twisted threads and sharp objects like an awl (a tool used for piercing holes in leather or other tough materials). The process described is rudimentary but reflects the resourcefulness of medical practitioners who had to operate under limited conditions.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and draw the thread through firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the awl, and perform all other necessary actions, and leave one hole for correcting any surplus blood. This passage outlines a procedure to address larger wounds (wide). After creating an initial suture with enough tension to ensure it holds ('draw the thread through firmly'), medical practitioners would then secure their work ('knot the thread') and remove the awl once its purpose was served, proceeding with any additional required treatment steps. It also mentions a specific technique—leaving one hole in the suture ('one hole for correcting surplus blood')—which could be used to drain excess blood from deeper tissues without causing further harm or complications.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place the bandage (drapelet) on the foundation either with rose oil or wax ('roset' and 'cerote'), and put it on the foundation, and command the patient that he lie down. This sentence provides guidance for post-suture care in medieval medicine, indicating two potential substances—rose oil and beeswax (commonly referred to as 'cerote')—to apply over the sutured wound ('bandage' or 'drapelet'). The application of these materials is thought to have been part of an attempt to protect the wound with natural remedinas. Furthermore, instructing the patient to lie down ensures that they remain in a position conducive to healing and reduces the risk of disturbing the sutured area during the recovery phase.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave them so long as they continue to cry out (to indicate pain), and when they are silent, then you treat other cures ('treatments') until he is sound. This instruction pertains to the management of postoperative care for patients who have undergone surgery. The line guides in the medieval medical procedure called 'chiefly bleeding out of sancere: 'Ainsi, "
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	nusseunt ifrance.entifferaillameantuelastorange,eschecresqueletifyentifereuinssociques :1auseurs:sansseurantheintheigneuxange izzardezelleuelles (3ultiangleuses andcherrevangeliere andssekhere thisangrenaire:noutherne citehastecurexances,enthe theccures:
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often happens suddenly severe events in the intestines, and due to natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It must be reset to the precise spot of a hernia or at your inguinal skin above it, which does not allow it to moisten.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heals as it should, just as it must;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it does not heal properly, then resect it again more strongly than before, until it is healthy once more, and scrape;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and it continues to heal until healthy again.
dou fremit	double tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formication is a misleading appearance before the heart, and it goes away quite fast;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never the cold sweat, and it feels like a death tremor in his entire body, more so than elsewhere;
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a small piece of peacock feather or a large one from a crow, and place it on the tremor, so long as the purple circles appear entirely around it;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the entire feather as long as you contain it entirely within the tremor, and place it on the spot, and scraped out the root of the tremor;
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it as a piece of iron or rawhide in this form, and be subtle and hidden beneath the skin:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	not notice because it moves in the same place, and continue pressing And if you see the tremor, then cauterize it as much as possible, whether it is right before or after the operation of caustic treatment.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the shape of this enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made an enema with silver or arcanum, or molten lead or tallow; and never done such small or large applications as are properly prescribed to them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, such small ones are used in the treatment of children who are weak and afflicted; they are little.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of this enema should not be too small or too large if the belly is arranged in such a way...
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it must have some discomfort or the belly be arranged so that you can see inside; and at one side of the armpit there may be an entrance...and in another [side]..
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	or it must have a belly where the medicine of a good bladder or paper is placed; and they should be observed from all sides...
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each of these pits there must be a space...then put the medicine in one of these pits with strong thread or flawed twine...and assemble the belly as if it were a keg.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the instrument at one end with strong thread...then enema; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold...and coat the head of the enema with oil or almond oil, or something similar...then pour it in gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the monks extract it with their hands together...until he is completely dry, and remove the enema, and ease his sore legs at the parting.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine is removed as much as it can; and if he sleeps all night long, then such greater aid for him.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	Fromer.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if his/her fistula is its foundation or abscess, then the cautery should also be applied subtly as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And it is the form of the subtle cautery applied as in case the skin is restrained.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in our division about the treatment of wounds; or you will say about hands and medicines, depending on completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made; and according to what kind or type of wounds they are made, and from what they have been caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that wounds are made by movement of the stone, and cutting with sword or knife, or with a spear or bow or stave, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the nature of the parts they are made on, like a wound that bites under the neck, or on the head, or shoulder, or chest, liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound; and firstly I will treat simple head injuries, because it comes up in my chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes on the head or shoulder, and the bone is not broken, but one must take care if it's due to movement of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn apart and the injury is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt a little bit about the incision: if it heals so soon at first from head to head mainly if there is only a little blood coming from the wound, then heal it on that part contrary to the nearby one.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And avoid the heavy swelling with wine and large foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not heal well, if it is reduced in size, and does not drink wine, or smoke a chimney.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply it to the wound, if you touch incision, let blood flow slowly, or in wine trickle.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	leseme d’un acoin. And iface demeal.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it has moved, then put some oil on it, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be brought together by themselves, but they are forced to join by covering them, just as I will say about abdominal wounds from stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is found in the bone and exposed, and it holds only for a moment when touched, then treat the wound with medication and restore hardness to its surface with leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large meats, like we have tried and cooked wheat, also bread, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you correct or treat scurvy, and it has not affected the bone, then cover the whole condition with oil, and let it heal.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if an artery is involved in the wound or vein without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if it does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these small and simple wounds are treated lightly: put the powder on it so that the arrow has moved again.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is: take a piece; blood from a dragon' Written by JP
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply healing to the wound, and hold firmly formed, until it dries well and joins all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then bind the fist tightly, allowing the sense of loosening to remain if it does not swell; because we do not apply medication until she is completely healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And there has never been such a thing done solely, when without the incense or blood of a dragon's scalp but that the arrow did not heal the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was so, unless someone applies this powder to it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But apply some digested ointments or bread made from barley flour with water and honey, as long as it remains swollen.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure other cures until he is completely healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then apply subtle pinches.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you this after the bone breaks.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is in the neck or it involves the same bone as the one that broke, but if the wound in the neck or if an arrow is lodged therein.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the neck, there should be no other intervention but to leave the treatment alone and not use anything restrictive, because it harms the neck and forces it back.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not apply anything to the wound, for the substances of the neck are cold, and the continuation of the blood with the brain, which is one of the highest members.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But if it is medicated like the milkstone which softens with warm water and oil, and also washes with warm water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other stones similar to this manner, and damp ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large; then treat it until he is whole.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and swollen with blood, then pierce deeper or further down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arrow is embedded, and blood clots form from it, then extract it, and cleanse it well, and the proper treatment for cautery must be applied.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if a thorn is embedded in the throat, or it causes bleeding, and its removal must be carefully done, for then the meat will follow. (Note: The phrase "la viande va" is difficult to translate directly but seems to imply potential complications during extraction that could affect surrounding tissues.)
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If it bleeds from the throat's sinus, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape. (Note: This translation interprets "la cainne de la gorge" as the "sinuses of the throat," which is an approximate interpretation since there might be a better term or phrase in Old French. It also assumes "le keur sus la cainne" refers to bleeding from these sinuses.)
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then the bandaging is done, and let no days pass without it, until he receives treatment with ointments as long as he remains healthy. (Note: The phrase "d'oignemens desechans" likely refers to treatments or care involving oil-based remedies.)
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has been made in bone, then heal it. (Note: "Empression" here may refer to an impression or impact within the bone caused by injury.)
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are pieces of bone, then you must drive nails into all the broken parts so that they cannot be removed, until the wound heals. (Note: The translation attempts to preserve the meaning while addressing possible ambiguities in phrasing.)
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if it is displaced and misaligned; (Note: "Desevree" refers to something being dislocated, and "aligie" pertains to alignment or straightening. This phrase is interpreting the text'its meaning regarding joint issues.)
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have mentioned before. (Note: The reference to "poudre" suggests applying a form of medicinal powder previously discussed in this context.)
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone within the wound and it has formed an abscess, then treat it as I have said in my chapter. (Note: "Fistule" refers to an abnormal passageway or a channel that can lead to an abscess.)
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of a spear or sword (Note: This line seems to be referring to types of wounds caused by sharp weapons, but without additional context, it's difficult to interpret this accurately. It may refer to a specific treatment for such injuries as discussed in the text.)
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's a wound from a spear or sword and the wound is deep, then look at how much wind pressure has caused the patient great pain and suffering; however, it is clear that the wound is deadly. (Note: This translation attempts to interpret complex medical terminology and context within the Old French text.)
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it is not deep, and fresh all the way through, then do not apply powder to it in the first hour nor bind it with wax that might delay healing of a wound that does not bleed. (Note: This translation provides an interpretation based on medical principles relevant to the time period when the text was written.)
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And reopen it up in its place, and let the pain go away. (Note: "Reviegne" seems intended to mean 'reopen' or restore anatomical alignment, while "ocie" may refer to alleviating suffering.)
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply attractive ointments and bind it a couple of times the day. (Note: This phrase suggests using certain types of beneficial ointments and binding as treatment methods for wounds.)
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	but if you don't have ointments, then apply plenty of cotton to suck out the blood from a wet or damp wound. (Note: This translation suggests using an absorbent material like cotton for managing certain types of wounds.)
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And let the patient lie on the wound for a few days, or three, or more as needed. (Note: The text suggests resting the injured area to promote healing.)
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	And if there is no further spasm or shaking of the body and not more movement. (Note: This line suggests monitoring for signs of continued contraction or shaking.)
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bones' positions, you know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat now also these tentatives and other cures, until he remains healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot be healed, and work is done, then you know that there has been an abscess; as the treatment should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is of sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or worse on the backside, then address this treatment first.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large in size, of clay; and if it is small, powdered, or embedded in bone with fragments, then attend to the wound and treat its depths, if there are furrows.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not dried up, let the wound grow, if it lightens the extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds to other members, we make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the abdomen are large and serious, as well as small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound there has never been a tear in the intestines, or tears in the intestines, because of the insertion of an abscess.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the cure is more difficult; and there has never been a time when the small wound was worse than the great one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because of this it is more likely to pierce the intestines into pieces, if they are not taken out bit by bit.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell almost immediately upon feeling the cold, so they are more likely to be pierced;
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because this wound is more important for us, that it causes the intestines to come back into their place where they should be;
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you know that the treatment of the abdomen consists of four methods:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the two common surgeries are applied to the abdomen;
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	And the dressing of other wounds with two fingers is common to other similar wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And in general they are cleaner with the dressing of the stomach, and I will say one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I will say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing from the intestines involved.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And there is one way of putting it back, which is by one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	Or by the small size of the wound, just as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because the intestines are inflamed due to the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And if it is cold, treat it in one part of the method:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Let there be a sponge or some damp cloth lightly soaked in water:
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you cook in water boiling, and salt and pepper:
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And raise the intestines if they have become so swollen:
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never made such restrictive measures, and is rather soaked to help unwind it.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling disappear, if it is most gentle on the intestines or better not cooked in water or other harmful substances:
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For by this it lightens the entrance so slightly:
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, make a little with the tool of choice and then take out the bloodletting:
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first treatment is massage more than cutting the hairs.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	We should not cut the hair with great necessity as it does not need to be done.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is an incision for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If cuts are made within the curve and not healed therein, then this shape will persist:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound has expanded and the intestines have been displaced:
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If the arrow is removed according to its natural shape from the body's proper place:
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	Should you have the opportunity, for it matters greatly:
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is extensive and located in proximity to the abdominal region:
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	It suggests that you should make the patient lie down on their back:
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	And elevate his legs higher than his head:
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	And if it's situated within the abdominal area:
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If he raises his head and belly higher than those areas:
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And furthermore, the abdominal rupture is found in one of its two parts:
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	Considering that the naval part is higher than the other:
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And hence it recommends this that I have described in large and small wounds:
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	It is small where it appears that you have dressed:
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then place your hand upon the patient who suffers from this malady:
et assemble les levres;	And gather his lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	0nde.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And it is that you provide a needle or several, depending on the quantity of the wound's size.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave the head of the wound. I will make some space, and I insert a needle or stiff wire into it.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the skin with the sharp hooks for the suturing.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is inside the skin where you will make it pierce that part.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and assemble the sutures for that joint bundle.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then lace a double thread through one part of the needle's eye.
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then assemble the sutures around the wound opening.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then make some space, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing so according to your skill with needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all the wound is contained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and be needles varied, subtle and large.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because subtle needles cover the entire wound, and large ones cannot fit properly:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for that they must be varied:
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and must not forcefully thrust them too deep into the wound or skin:
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they don't cover and do the wound before the stitching:
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cover the needles so that they do not catch on the patient's hair at night:
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I provide covers or bandages for the needles so that they remain in place:
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is sutured:
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of suturing is more suitable for small wounds:
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it allows for using one or two needles:
Li seconde costure si est commune,	and the second suture is common:
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	soul, le. : ij ail of theic:al-ly alluiat. I'sant cepei. Commentare andesure jawlerecte ofire oughteinsear asent toifre:souller.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have perceived these four groups of joints.
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the arrow to the part where it was aimed at, in the manner that one pays for the arrows.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And place space between each stitch the size of a minor coin;
ceste costure sevent li home,	This suture should be made by hand;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	And I sut a wound from one's hands or belly;
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was nailed with a knife;
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was more than one hand's span wide;
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was two palms wide in its interior;
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was in between the belly;
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	And I returned the intestine which had been there for twenty-two hours;
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sutured again just five years later; and it healed;
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him of the infliction because there was no oil or place in which to apply any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	The wail. Et en. l'encontre la plaies par legez. La cestant arivac:meintres tost.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I will now translate the given Old French medical treatise text line by line into English:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and draw it into the lower part where I am located within.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When she has perceived the pain rightly and firmly, if her shoulder is swollen or dislocated, you should either set it straight with your hands or use a needle.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	And let her examine other parts where I am within.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	And he understands this treatment as if you were like leatherworkers making pouches,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And once you have set the shoulder blade on one side, and then repeat it on the other, as long as the treatment is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of this medical practice, which Galen explains properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If it is so that no one does this, assembling the two sides together naturally.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	And apply one side to the other side similarly:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Insert a needle or set it straight at another point nearby, and let her examine only that area.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And let the two sides of the shoulder blade alone;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle around, and let her examine those areas where I am inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	like the two sides of the shoulder blade;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then let her examine both sides of the lower internal parts where I am located within, in other words, touching or setting it right on the opposite shoulder blades.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most common method of dressing and bandaging.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen uttered these words without any witnesses.
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	We must stitch the abdomen with nails, or have thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And it must be that one nail is thrust from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who join metals.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And it is known that when the suture is within the abdomen,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If it is the costume more grazed than other similar abdomens.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	Our judgments about the wound are such as those concerning other wounds;
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is that when you dress the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the arrow may move from it.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If it puts back an intestine and the costume; then puts powder on a bent joint, charging it with fire.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the arrow has moved, it puts on some bandage where there is one, as long as the wound bleeds;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And firmly tied the thread, and joined them with cords and straps;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as for other wounds, so long as it remains sound.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no medicine, put it on as soon as he begins to bleed, and then pull out the hairs;
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And let him move it back and forth each day until he is sound.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other medical knowledge beyond what can handle simple wounds.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound may cause community among the main limbs.
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	and it is required for you to wash gently in tepid oil or rose oil.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it over the angels, and on the stones.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if it sends pain or rot in bellies, and many times occurs.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if you cauterise with black wine poured into it, and immediately then rottenness comes to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and perforate through them, and know that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is constricted.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and for the proximity of these veins that they are in, and the subtlety of their entire course, and how close to their natural state it is.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the abscess jumps from the wound, if it is reset as the intestine would be after healing.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it's large and turned towards the head or black, then you must close the vein that is black with blood discharges.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for it has vessels and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then seize that which is between them.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	:ing soevoice:0reinjurse -it:sessex :<brithoreve morce.luexe.wax.gesteille,se, theuccarue tiexentefles.celle peche defficementxenturet’ocreaugeuxe ceant tocsseurieu seisex:sanglerelacithe,elargantes
de la routure dou boueil	sage;ngeaude theesce 5reveaux.naguandez socufreuxseurcheletieux de peucthexile estaglescithectherme aigudexinclamebleuire:t' screwximagasteneriagne hieragne’ shevre,ises therefyngifreves. the luante
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the bowel becomes twisted, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it cannot be restored in any cases,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen some men wounded or struck by a spear in the abdomen;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was a wound in the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became swollen and developed into a fistula, leading to digestive output and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I saw and continued to delicately care for it until healed, and the ligaments were tied up;
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it tied up, I doubted that he would not have further issues in his abdomen;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not experience any further issues but improved in better conditions, gaining strength and appetite;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And no one told me that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up as follows;
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	first take large tests, then bring together the edges of the wound;
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when these tests go beyond the opening of the wound, if they place them on its edges;
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she pulls her mouth outwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he raises his head, which should not loosen;
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then he performs another test in that manner as before, until the wound is completely addressed;
et cout la plaie.	and measures the wound;
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	Such an issue if it goes into the intestines does not cause harm to the patient;
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and if it could be tied up with a fine thread from the intestines of an animal;
en teil maniere:	in such manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	sansin.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	songes;destoignifaire:faplameblecture
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then he inserts the thread into the needle, and pulls out the intestine, and relocates it in the course of treatment.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of sewing flesh is not fatal according to the path of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and deep, particularly when it is in one of the intestinal loops, there is neither healing nor health because of its delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Knows that any wound or incision, as it heals, becomes universally known as "fistula."
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And immediately when it is checked and drawn back (referring to a wound or incision being inspected).
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the old belief very difficult and painless, or there is no pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it is also checked like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And there is no clear jump back (referring to a lack of clarity in the healing process), and sometimes it is thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes only a little, and other times enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken about the division of wounds where every unhealed wound does not exist.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is not fatal only for one of the seven reasons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It is that small amount of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	Or by its malicious nature.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because it is hard within and under the lips, and does not allow for anything to be born there.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or it has too much blood.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or its threads are poor, and the material is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good in the healing.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Or because it is the way of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	s:ceteraidexure:
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	And there are bones to heal from:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	I have already shown these causes, signs, and treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is important that you understand the treatment of fistula made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	You know that fistulas occur in all limbs with great pain.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	whether in the spleen, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the vertebrae of the backbone, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the principle part of the limb, and its signs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind require serious treatment, and there is no remedy except labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	but if there is no fistula that healed at all with what I have said, and you have faith in the treatment.
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you have seen it understood, if he takes a tent of straw or iron, whether the fistula is straight, whether it curves.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, it seeks a subtle tent of water;
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for because the pressure on it changes due to its twisted nature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has an opening in it and you cannot properly find it with tents;
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	by inserting a catheter through one of its openings;
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because if one washes it from one opening and puts water in another;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then it may straighten out your hope that you know whether there is bone or nerve inside, and if it has been wounded.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask well of the patient about his pain when you press with your hand, and where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly where it is, and whether it's far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of these places that I have told you about, according to what I have said to you;
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And bone heals the other wound, and the rotten parts that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is well dug in the right place, it requires that you dig deep, as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then I apply wet bandages in watery fever, and pour them down to the head of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine dissolves the unnecessary bulk that lingers at the bottom of the fistula.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply hot medicinal herbs, as long as they are healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it is not healed by this method, then we must cauterize as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is rotten around the fistula, you must deal with it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If there are no obstructions or main body parts affected, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	If the bone is exposed, and it has decay and blackness; then he must treat until all the decay in the bone has been removed.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I continue treating warm medicinal herbs as long as they are healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if it is not healed by this method; and then the fire must be reintroduced as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You know that you are not going anywhere just yet:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you discover and want as long as you remain at the bottom (or center),
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And treat all decay within the bone, then restore its healthy appearance;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is so healthy afterward, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not so, you know that the decay has been too extensive to expect any improvement;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other remedy but natural lactic acid;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if there is even a small rotten bone, and you must pull it out with forceps;
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	: in French: Ipsum, ilocution a en françaisly'science a the English. And therefrom:en français. Iuste catholiere;escription. Whatitentence.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is any bone left, tear it all away, so that none remains.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture causes no opposition or fear.
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if coping and moisture with caution and care, to release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot apply it in an hour, should the wound receive any congealed matter entering it.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let them be placed upon the bones until they are firmly established.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and thereby, if there is more movement in the bones subsequently.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large one, whether as in a leg or thigh bone;
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	:Dentities devisesment toi soins:ent a l'inventaire etre of the mons devisen le morale lector. Aeneur lesions.
puis restoure la plaie;	Then dress the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of cartilage rotten, and it comes out in small pieces from the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it must be covered and sealed as much as possible right at the onset of decay, and then treated until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to him - in his leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	So that you can give examples and assistance in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man who had been in his late twenties, suffering from pain in his leg due to an issue that originated within the tissue or muscle.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	So long as these materials came into contact with the leg and were expelled from a large incision, without any clear reason to open it again.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	But their fear of overdoing it led them to operate on the incision again, possibly due to concern over complications or recurrence of symptoms.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	And they introduced a lot of materials, which resulted in the formation of a fistula and caused many loose fragments and pockets of moisture within the joint.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	And yet they continued to treat him for over two years and made no progress in the art of hands (surgical skill).
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	So that I called upon you, and examined his leg and the remedies with which he had been treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And that it grew from one large pocket in the joint, which had accumulated over time due to continued inflammation or fluid build-up inside the area.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And it became red and yellowish in appearance on the young man's joints.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I tried placing a drainage tube in one of these pockets, and then searched for all the other pockets.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that one came into contact with the other parts of his leg as well.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	:cumpleyse to thei'sre comme sentence. ouldre: (it.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it rotten and decayed, and there was corruption right inside the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw someone appear from the rotten bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption, since it was what I had seen.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to restore the wound with similar remedies over a long time, but it could not be healed.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	And then I tried again, and discovered the bone just like before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And I found the continued corruption in the bone, and I tried to heal it, but then I was burdened by trying to join the fragments.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	But I could not make much progress because when I tried to join one piece of the bone, it was broken into its entirety.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then I restored it with remedies again; and soon it was healed and joined together hastily.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And there was no need to repeat the work except because of the slight weakness in the patient who could not bear it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And out of fear of death, lest I lose him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For there was often bloodletting involved, but it resulted in complete healing.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and in the flesh of the bone arose a hard stone, and it had no harmful effect or contrary result throughout everything, neither from pulling it out nor from its return.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is fractured in no place where there was a nerve cord, it must be mended in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take one line, and strain it at the head of the fractured part of the bone.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command nothing to extend upward.
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another strip of cloth thicker than the first one under the stone that is on top of the bone.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and they are placed, so that you can drag the corrupted part out.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and you found out the stone on top of the bone whereof it did not break.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and he gives a stick or a tablet inside the bone to cover the corrupted part;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and must have silk enough to be seen and felt as decay.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the decay lies in its midst or within a part.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if they find the decayed part; then place a stick inside.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then bandage the decay from one part to another, and make it longer than the decay by about as much as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the decay is in the joint, cover the decayed joint and bandage the bone that contains it from another part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the decay is in the continuity of the two joined areas, there is no other solution than to cover it.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the decay is in the thumb or palm of the hand, or on either side of the finger, then it's a very significant issue.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	But overall, it is required that you seek out this decay, as it opens (comme) it does not open for you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And he directs it to be done in all ways possible without hurting the vein or nerve.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and you know that the saws and bristles are often used to cover these bones, according to the structure of the bones and appearance of teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it requires for each kind of operation an instrument of this sort;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and you will come to know the instrument which you shall need according to your knowledge of this craft;
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and a testimony to the methods of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if, according to it, you know the instrument which you need;
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	the joints dislocate or due to dampness;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have made a concoction for treating these eruptions by means of remedies;
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	if it is necessary to cover that limb up to its joint or where the eruption comes;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if so that he suffers greatly from death or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of a limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs show that the limbs become black, as if they were charred by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards comes the blackening of one member after another,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and spreads throughout the entire body; if it hastens by covering (with fire),
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the sting of any poisonous beasts, as with a sea scorpion or wasp and similar creatures,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head of the doctor, it troubles him and does not give him any space to come near with his hands.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just at the hand, then he covers it up at the joint, so that the corrosion does not move to arms.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes at the arm, then he covers it up there; but when it passes that cover, it is his death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no comparison between the quantity of his courage and virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and all from now on so that when the corrosion comes in its first or second joint, he covers it with the other.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes again, he covers all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises up into the leg, then he covers at the junction of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to let the pained limb die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner in which it covers or tightens up the member if thou coverest it above and below;
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	s: a : theorice:escriture. Hereof. Theu : itin. ous lesse. And thefier la colereincaisse de toutreignentifar. Ifromes.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you draw out the cartilage between the two joints of one large chamber, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	and you apply a cloth or woolen bandage on each side of one strip of linen, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy limb;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and tighten around the patient another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if bleeding occurs as you work, then immediately cauterize the limb.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you apply constraining powders on them; then return to your medical practice until it is completed;
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the painful limb with a joint concave, and treat it until it becomes healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one of my patients:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	it seemed like a black heat or scorching fire;
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion came first to her side of the patient, so it affected the entire body;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corrosion, he would cover it up with a bandage to heal;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards, that corrosion returned to him or took hold of his hand, and came to me;
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I subjected him to counteractive measures after the purifying of the corrosion, but could not stop its recurrence;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he suggested that I apply the treatment to his hand, but with hope of repelling the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also feared that if I left his hand alone, he might suffer;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because his body had weakness in it; he despairingly returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and after covering it up with bandages to heal;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have told you this story only because it was relevant to what we do; if there is any other information that might be of interest, let me know.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Rarely does a joint become swollen, and it lingers for so long that there is an abundant accumulation of blood.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	then come back to him, and he jumps his hairs again, as if it were a patient's hair.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the skin which is above is also very delicate like. i. silk-like.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "unhealthy" when they affect.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not affected by "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so elongated that it bends the bone in two places, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the burn so that you deal with all of the skin at once, and immediately when it is delicate, like silk dresses.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not cause its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have a doubt that the skin will harden, and its corruption is not in any part.
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is eager for cleansing, so it heals with this purging of a washcloth:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	observe if the breasts are large, and the belly which is attached to them has an unpleasant smell.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	And thus the Egyptian medical washcloth cleansing that is done herein:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ashes, oil, and vitriol, equally apply them, and then bake in one vessel over the fire.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	so long as the medicine is red and thick like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then proceed according to your need, bake in water and honey;
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and in the washing of the breasts, and preventing their discharge;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain in place for two hours, then strain it out;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times as long as the breasts are full and bony;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And there have been no times when a water vapor of ash is cleansed.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, and you must cleanse with coal dust from grapevines, and pour water above.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then the broth, and in cleansing, as long as you know that her chest is well formed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if she cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor the water of coal ash will help her.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if in cleansing with water and honey there is even a little bit of cauterization;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you cleanse with honey and mead, for it has properties to purify and cleanse her.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine causes her air to flow.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And once you have done that, if you believe her chest is well-purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the cleansing causes it to arise again in her;
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and if you must apply heating dressings, done with rose oil and in wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse her with various medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned their properties or treatments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the dislocation of her chest is small, and cleansing cannot enter;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you enlarge it slightly with a nail and place on Egyptian ointment tent;
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or Basilican ointment, as long as it enlarges it;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, let it be sufficient so that cleansing may enter in one day.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if he pierces a wound that goes above, it shall lie on top of or below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	And when the fire burns form a wound, it does not allow for loosening of flesh.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the patient's chest as you see fit.
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If it appears such that the fire moves downward to the lowest place where it is.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the fire burns a wound, it prevents loosening of flesh.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the patient's chest according to your desire;
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	nissin. œtire Thearre.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And take consolidant medicines to apply on the chest,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are under a piece of linen that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then they apply pressure at the breast puncture, which is slightly more than half of the first one;
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	but they anoint soreful places under another piece of linen according to the quantity of the punctures;
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and they put it in the breast puncture to align the wound, and do not remove the sharp linen fragments for more than one day;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and who is on the breast puncture site often needs to remove the bandage;
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what comes out of the wound: if it is poison, or a little, or digested, or not digested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care that the patient feels pain or not; if it has abscessed or not;
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has taken effect to some extent; you see the nature that has come out of the breast puncture;
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts have already begun to heal; and approach your caregiver;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then it moves in the morning, or after a few days; when you discharge the wound;
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change another piece of linen and renew the anointing;
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts have digested poison after many days, know that the breasts do not heal;
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	́sans les poinct que, pourprez :rre, lou : leu, ous :20thairy inveses: Le. From theires laioun. Ien françaises and iton : The Old English translation apeuthe soneau, tokne. In French.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health care. For it has people who delay healing of wounds by cauterizing them with fire, and those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if the bowels are distended after several days, it shows that the abdomen does not return to normal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the abdomen takes a long time to return, and is pushed away, indicating that mixed medicinal preparations involving both liquid and dry components may be necessary.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As with diphtheria, for it has a great part of vitriol (potassium carbonate), and it is the treatment.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	They apply diphtheria treatment, and they do it with rose oil, and the mixture includes a lot of strong wine as a component.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then it preserves and uses it; and this way makes the wound become more swollen and inflamed.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When diphtheria treatment is still present.
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder on honey when it is cooked in the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in glue. i. drapel, and it is applied to the breast, and no time has ever been wasted applying an anthelmintic long-lasting treatment.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and celestial lily roots, which are also like flour in quantity and measure of a hundred.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in using simple or composite mixtures: grind them, make powder from it, and put it on the honey that I mentioned, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the treatment is prolonged, it should not be treated with this remedy.
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and you know that it is incurable, and made an impression on the bone, or hardened joints, or fissures.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of the fistula, as we have said here before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the incision in the joint
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarique is an incision made on the thigh of a bag-like object attached to the hand.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or on the thigh of a bag-like object, or by chance it also appears in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is inflamed, and one does not pay attention to it if it appears as a bone fissure,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they will crumble and break the thighbone as much as it decays its root in the joint, and by chance it might break entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and it comes to the bone corruption there, so long as it causes a pungent pain, and it is the dislocation of the two large joints, and its color turns yellowish.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the case of a fracture, and there is no benefit from such treatment;
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	indicating that one must remove all excess iron deposits from the joint;
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	and then cauterize the wound afterwards;
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	and this aid serves the bones, and in the first sentence is ite en la pecces qu’il neuf eaux: lez veneur.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	And if it presses too much on the skin, and the beginning of the blood appears, and the wound,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It is essential that you place the rag over the joint where the skin cannot move.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and raises it high, and lifts the delicate joint gently and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and places on top of the wound medicine containing acids to heal it completely;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treats it with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, and heals it, for as long as the bone is corroded, it cannot be cured.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see him corroding, heal him in a few days just like it has been said before;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then tend to heal until it is healthy again;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is disobedient, and you hit it, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the upper part of the joint out at an angle above;
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And it was advised that one should avoid cutting just above the joint (to prevent exacerbating pain), for those suffering great discomfort felt immense pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if there be something that soothes it (should a complication arise).
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain that dulls from the hand (should discomfort be alleviated).
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	They must be joined together (should some individuals suffer nerve damage) entirely by chance [^4].
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And in some cases, he may lose bones, and there are occasions when only part remains [^5].
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them are born at the root of the joining, for their birth is not among us [^6].
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who do not die from any twofold disease remain silent, and it is thus.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those who perish at the juncture of two diseases may become mute by chance;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is fleshly and light in part is;
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	In size from its root a wide spatiumle (spatiumle might refer to a measurement space, though it's not clear in this context).
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who perish at the root of the juncture are greatly in need of healing; if one holds it twice over.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In that which perishes or must be relieved from pressure on the body, it is necessary to cover first the rounding of flesh until reaching bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cover the bone with an adequate bandage until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come together from the two joined areas are due to birth, or by sore wounds, or by burns of fire, or by similar occurrences.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it covers the sore area, then it must be repaited according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place two lint or linen layers imbued with roses' oil so that they do not join together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place two thin pieces underneath it so that the wound is sutured together as it should be;
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The swellings come from neither of his two points with the palm, if it is sore covered as it should be;
Des vils	Of fires cautery commands the Malade let the hairs long and even; and if they prick at their base, he restrains them so they do not move until they grow.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Large dislocations are swollen and filled with melancholic superfluousness that come from several limbs.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you must never perform a cleansing of the colon, and then maintain its health like that in the sanctuary.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The iron treatment follows these methods: one involves applying pressure and then drawing out the black blood (darkened blood).
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you bind the vein, and then draw out all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting method is done as follows: you raise the leg with warm water very much so that it remains large without subtle movements.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the malady patient's leg above the knee down to the area of the groin.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then compress the vein in one, two or three points, with a large size.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then release and draw out the black blood (sanguineous discharge) from your hand, from one end to the other, as long as it seems that much as a sign of the malady's strength.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then bind him (the patient), and he is commanded to eat black foods, which may inflame the colon.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	In medieval and treche deuin le :vaince en aille :en:grosse tounia. AIge. Ipsum in it islaid : theur :20103 (theorlulates ould, " The French toit : Allée.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The treatment of the patient's limb follows this manner: let the weakened leg of the sick person be cut off if it has much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then place him in a bath and let the hot water make his leg turn red and swell the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire and then apply it to the long vein at the top of the knee or in the area around the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	After the incision is made, and it tears away any piece of vein tissue as long as he feels pain.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And if the vein appears black and blue in color, and sojourn: "cupsenture d'avantage leu les oeuvre de la chair de l’alice :.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then he inserts the rod underneath, so long as the skin is lifted, and then he proceeds to pull it swiftly along the line.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then he cuts into another joint here three times; then he removes the skin from the vein as long as it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then he lifts the rod, just as you have done before, and pulls along another line, if you have done so first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then he makes another cut, or more if you are skilled in it, then lifts the rod and pulls along the second vein.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then he draws and lifts at this second cut; then pulls out in stages until it flushes completely, then lifts.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot draw and lift her, then insert a sharp needle into all of them at once.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And you draw and pull her, and there inserts a rod here and there, turning your hand on one side and the other as long as it flushes.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep that it does not catch, for if it does, then you cannot draw or lift her, and it is harmful to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have drawn her completely, if you place on the edge of the wound a clean lint and oil roses, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if you see him contracted and twisted and wrapped together, not straight as we have said before.
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And it presupposes that you twist her incorrectly, but do not cover her at all; and draw as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which they pull the vein is like a hook, and it does not cut in such a way that it pierces the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is quite heavy because if it were slight, it would pierce the vein; but whether large or as we have said before, this is its shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein (civil vein)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where there are no grass or trees, and on earth without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it can also be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs because of the furry growth undernee's skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	As it comes within the body of snakes and towards, in the area between the skin and bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a great inflammation.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	:source devisa fromage of theur lungs liethre (it’s unt aurex:12 deafixentille defface, il la. It'sis. Age : A. Asin:
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	veille tosttroiet:sure:naturallite:screature. ⁠ic:sufi (faible.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	And let the mass hang during the leg, and every time it comes to rest at the foot, if the sheath enters around the mass, and the new one.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining around it, and do not cover its root while it has completely come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, it goes back into the vein and causes abscess formation or inflammation of the bone, and illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for that reason it must be treated little by little until it is almost gone, and not leave any stump or fragment.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and there are times when this vein when it is treated with a quarter of the length of the leg or half,... (Note: The ellipsis indicates missing content that was not provided in the original text.)
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some came to me who had it issuing from half the length of the leg, and when you cut it, if there is a branch or perforation, then pierce it downward as well.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out; and let the material inside be washed away, and apply various medicines for inflammation every day to prevent bone formation, then treat it as one would with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And there are no times for this vein to rain, and immediately when it opens at the junction of bones or bone.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and comes out a lot of perforations, and which come to flow; treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Arrows that are embedded between skin and bone.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is prevalent in our land "beast disease," because it occurs frequently with boils.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And it is a small arrow that lies between the skin and bone, and goes through all the length of the body up and down.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it feels well in every limb member by member until it comes out from under the skin or goes through it, and bursts forth.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is accompanied by inflammation of some fluids, like those that come from the womb or intestines and scabies or belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and there is doubt about its malignity, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and comes out at the oil.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance it returns and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cured and extracted, no one can force it back:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	and it must be that you cut above and below with a strong tight ligament.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut it down and pull on it, and the arrow entered from the heart.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	medieval medical Latin line-sor melee vouldes orlonge: "17th century acheve dire'sar: the tocarre. Fromage.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	ssecthecures  :maignaire in reference to agernecteuction'stretchescribe:s oneximpleic iapectrener itherreche.nicherdecteicharre frommanturectherectifecitheleclexange,saiveryngthencelle for himachanimeuxelonggevocitextoldescecoldescrans devoidant iaugentififores (it'allecus ifte,nherreveuvesse.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see him coming near the oil or head first, hold his shoulder firmly above it, and then cover it with hot water.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is required that the patient use clean tools for dissolving medicinal solutions to treat those diseased humor imbalances.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if he eats raw meats, it will cause putridity.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is prevalent on our land "wakir", and it's a pain that comes to any limb.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen this myself.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a woman ill with fever, and found her arms, and saw a small swelling on the vein.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And shortly after, I saw it rise up as if a worm in the shoulder.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	As quickly as anything, like hot coin when it's cut from another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain left that place and settled in the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And shortly after it ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me it was turning around the body again, just like I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was most surprised to see her move from limb to limb like this, as I had never seen a disease manifest in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	So far, I had seen many who have wanted to move pain from one place to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	But I had never seen it before, as I saw her in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	And I thought that it was because she had a hard heart and the veins were uncovered.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	: "The original precenture, and theilighten (1000. Theo aundecent. The text.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear according to this reason for those who are delightful, and have moist hearts and repaired veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain we have mentioned...
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the lodestone above and below suddenly shakes, and then pours as much as the constricted inflammation forces it to flow...
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it at your eyes... (Note: "leu" likely refers to blood vessels in this context, given medieval medical terminology. The reference to seeing something at one's eyes is interpreted here as observing a particular sign or symptom.)
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the curing of that which dispels constriction, like foul pills and Serpent's powders, and similar things... (Note: "Pilules fetides" refers to putrid medicines; "pilules de serapin" likely refers to a historical use or belief in treating certain conditions with substances related to the legendary creature, the Serpent. This part of the text speaks about various methods believed to disperse constriction.)
Des saiettes	Of arrows (referring to the extraction of foreign objects from wounds)
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the places they enter or hurt... (Note: This line is describing various types of wounds caused by foreign objects entering the body with different manifestations.)
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is that there are some which have great points, and small ones, and hairs, and soldered... (Note: This line appears to describe the different kinds or shapes of foreign objects that could enter a wound. It refers to sharp-pointed objects as well as less harmful types.)
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some which have two angles, and others which have lengths, and those in which there are fragments... (Note: The text here seems to be listing different types of wounds based on the characteristics of how they were caused. "De celles qui ont .ij. angles" may refer to puncture wounds with two points entering the body.)
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which hurts in no part but hurts according to .ij. manners: or it hurts chiefly on a limb covered with hair... (Note: This line describes wounds that do not affect the body's main parts ("member principiel") but rather specific areas where there is hair, such as on a hairy limb.)
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as in skulls, bodies, livers, hernias, stomachs, intestines, bladder, and similar parts... (Note: This line lists various body parts that could be affected by these types of wounds, providing a general overview of potential sites for such injuries.)
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it hurts nowhere in any part of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you afterward... (Note: This line indicates wounds so severe they do not cause pain in specific body parts but are instead associated with signs of mortality. The follow-up is likely to describe symptoms or indicators suggesting a life-threatening condition.)
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it indicates that you must warrant the extraction of this arrow because death approaches in various conditions... (Note: The text suggests that removing an embedded arrow is crucial since its presence can lead to several dangerous outcomes or "dispositions" for the patient.)
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear to you, nor is the arrow visible (in the flesh), then pull it out, and treat the wound... (Note: The text advises on what actions should be taken if an evidenced injury or a non-obvious foreign object such as an arrow remains unaddressed in the body.)
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull where the arrow pierces and protrudes outward from under the skull... (Note: This line describes a severe injury involving an arrow that penetrates the skull. The phrase "saute la face" likely refers to how the object is positioned, with the 'syfac' being a misspelling or misunderstanding of medical terminology.)
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when scotomia and inflammation and convulse sensory disorder, and incontinence, and vomiting of spirit.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	sure.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And when the wound swells white like feathers, and also it springs up as if it were burnt charcoal.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears to you during the treatment, and if the arrow is not yet drawn out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of swelling when it decreases or increases is that it is close to the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the swelling also moves like hairs, and there is sometimes black blood, and comes coldness with chilly sweat, and faintness.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Thus you have doubt that it will be unhealthy.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never stays untouched is that it does not have a clear fluid discharge from the wound, and the throat swells up, and its hues deepen with painful breathing, and sharp coughs for choking on debris.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead decreases in depth within its covering point, it is located near small hollows; and produces great pain and sharp coughing; and all parts of limbs tremble.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead penetrates into the stomach, perhaps no signs indicate undigested meat in the wound discharge.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead penetrates into the belly, and in its descent through intestinal pathways; there is no hope for the treatment or removal of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead penetrates into the bladder, and its presence disrupts urine flow, causing intense pain; you can conclude that the wound is lethal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other parts of the body, if they experience similar symptoms to those in the left breast and abdomen—such as the chest, neck, shoulder, external support, dorsal vertebrae spines, thigh muscles, knees, legs, and limbs overall—are considered subject to multiple underlying conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	And if the arrowhead is embedded within a nerve or an artery, and it'ran not poisoned; let me tell you about a similar case I encountered because of these circumstances.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one house, where an arrow was lodged in the nerve root of his neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	The end onpremerde, si leslc'sesme taille.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And strikes with a javelin which fell into the fat of oil beneath the paper underneath.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the javelin was put back, and it did not move again towards the wood.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it was large of an Arbanese (Arc Turcus) bow, with all its legerity in the form of a thin iron rod, and the shot was sounded well, and no unfortunate event occurred to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And struck with a javelin from the throat of a Crusader, and the javelin was Arabic in form:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I plucked out the hairs and removed them subtly as I struck, and it was well sounded for the Crusader.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And struck with a javelin at one place, whether it was the chest or belly, and I thought he had died;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then, having passed thirty years, it did not change its position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on top of the javelin and removed it, and when I struck, there was no unfortunate accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man where a javelin fell on his back, and the wound was sutured thereupinas.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and kept the javelin inside him without changing his natural dispositions;
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and found no harmful effect on any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you may see another man where a javelin fell on his face, and the wound was sutured thereon.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and suffered great pain in this way; and many other signs followed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And struck at one man who was the prince of kings, and he had it hidden between his thighs.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly weakened on the right side; and the javelin was fully recovered.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I called for the treatment after it had been opened. Twelve years ago, I found the wound to be very wide.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I questioned her about everything in a subtle manner, and did not feel anything at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and it felt a sting and pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from a stakepoint
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed it under the empyreal fire treated to digestive purposes, because its flesh did not burn.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw its flesh from the stake.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the empyreal fire to it many years ago, and healed the wound directly, and since then the patient has suffered long pains.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	so long as he felt the stake within his side; and then he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied cauterizing herbs by hand many years ago when the wound had opened;
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried it out, and felt the head of the stake coming to rest in its place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied the same herbs over the wound again in its opening, and I saw the head of the stake visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and ended very well after two months;
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I took the tools from both sides, one with my hand and one in mine, but it would not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	because I never ceased to subtly practice and improve the methods of manipulations, until one year having taken them well-crafted pliers.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to what will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it and left the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge says that the cardiac band cannot restore a nose.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I left it again, and the wound was sealed, and the patient's entire ailment healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or you have told me about the quality of extracting some arrows.
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you apply your remedy to that which I do not say, for no book can encompass all things.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters know very little about it, and what is present or absent therein.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Nine works and nine instruments are used in the dissection of things extricated from this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say the arrows do not come from members or they are driven because of certain ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	whether they enter through their opening or from another place;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And the one that jumps out or enters is an arrow piercing into the body's flesh, and it never happens nowadays.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump nowadays, let her be until the flesh is softened and she can be removed.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if she is driven into bone, and it cannot come out, let her be left for a while, and heal each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and if it jumps, then penetrates into any part of the wound thoroughly (si cez parties), until the flesh around it is expanded, and then I will remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is driven into the skull bone and lies in one of the brain cavities (venters).
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have described in this book (sorrurge de .i. cest chapistre ço que li leu : desir les plaine: seigneur dame.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	il theesuiens:sac fromurle.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the splinter does not penetrate deep into the bone but only to the bone itself, and it still comes out through its surface,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and prolongs the patient's sensitive years without any major accidents, if the device for pulling out becomes troublesome.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deep and cannot be extracted, then I will apply treatments as I told you; then heal the wound until it becomes sound.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the splinter is pushed back into the bone where it cannot be seen, as long as it covers everything with its tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if the device to extract has no accessible parts;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot reach the depth of the wound, and through the perforation of the splinter,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in it, so long as the wound remains large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and extract the splinter if you can, and if there are ears on the splinter holding it in place.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if there is a piece of bone that has been pierced through by about 0.5 inches where you can extract it.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or crumble the ears on the splinter as much as you can to facilitate extraction;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly so that you do not fracture the splinter when extracting it more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, if the wound extends to the muscle beneath, then extract it, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if blood emanations from you contradict this, and I will provide what we have spoken about the treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the nerve incisions and the vein during extraction, considering how you can remove the splinter without causing additional risks. The emphasis here is on cautious extraction to avoid exacerbating existing conditions such as injury or bleeding from nearby structures like nerves and blood vessels.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently, adjust your approach according to the shape and condition of the splinter when it falls back into place. This highlights the importance of adapting extraction methods based on specific circumstances and the state of the splinter.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because it can be more helpful in this situation, and if you cannot do it according to the signs shown by your body's symptoms. This acknowledges that sometimes an intervention may not be possible or advisable depending on the patient's condition.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The splinter that comes from elsewhere does not reveal any particular issues or shows no sensation unless it's seen or felt prominently: This indicates situations where the origin of the splinter is unclear, and there are no obvious symptoms indicating complications. Treatments would proceed with caution in these ambiguous cases to prevent further injury.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	then beneath it as much as the tongs can reach, and extract it if it has just been inserted (implying extraction): This line seems to be discussing the use of tongs or tweezers for extraction when a splinter is freshly embedded in the tissue, indicating that immediate action should be taken.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, as long as it enters thebone and extracts: This appears to be interpreted (likely, se tu ne li veins, etes demeurant leus, les plusiers esparagines; ou il peut avoir grant, l’ongeans deu du choses de la vauté.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	oussira ce tiare: Laurs encelesbare lai’lait. Ailve ence illac laisser.cetera:ateur. Thevérecreationes anderaise, sirol. It. Cajt. Ilice. Ibreith, sejourentre.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	nifferresse forsoifre. expiraisons
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if he was tightened, and you saw to administer binding, using a hair comb as the instrument.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the tool; and then pushes firmly.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the arrow is caught, he pushes with that instrument having its point entering in, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, it must be that you take all the charge or the poison enters, as long as you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as best you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow has penetrated to the skin, or muscle, or bladder, and it is close by, then you can cover it up, as long as it does.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And do not cover the vein and nerve, then extract, and then close up the wound, as long as it is necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat until she is healthy again.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pincers which have arrows similar to a bird's beak; and here it is:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of arrows.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The form of the two-pronged comb is also like the feather of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	in order to push the point of the arrow, as it is shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the pincers to push and know how it is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common venomous snakes.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Snake bites that healed were 21, and it took them six days to recover.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	That is to say: 30 bats that are after the ears, which they call the "douche" herbs.
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the 30 arteries that are visible in their temple areas.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and 30 veins that are in the corners of their lips, which they call "aspirates".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in front of it; and the venom that is at its head.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the 30 arteries that are under their collar (shoulders).
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the 30 veins that are above their lips, which they call "augeriches".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the 30 veins that are under their tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly healed are .vi in each arm.
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is cilte deffices: les evescure.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the moisture is lifted "fast", and it consists of the cranial and caudal,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call them "body veins"; and the caudal is on their right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call them "belly veins"; and it is under the diaphragm.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And that one which heals well, with clearly visible openings in the sac.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the scapular vein is the one that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two roots.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg and where the bones are three veins: one is situated on the right side of the abdominal wall near the belly button.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second saphenous vein which is on the right side of the foot's instep; and the vein called "blood" that exists in the other instep.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are three: these ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healthy veins that follow behind the ears aid in treating old cases of inflammation and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the quality of the healthier one, as I have said to you, and it is that you reset the leader of the patient.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And smears his skin or veins with coarse cloth; then tightens the patient's neck with a pin.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	So long as the three veins behind the ears appear in their own channels under the leader's head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	But when you do your duty, and you feel my finger on your body, it comes from there.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lance, and thrust it through the vein just under the bone, then lift your hand all around the vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And cut and sew up the skin and vein properly for two turns in that area, and draw out the blood as long as you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then stretch and tie it up until it is healthy again.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery, in my first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healthy arteries that are located in the two temples are worth for treating old cases of migraines.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And there is also astigmatism and tear ducts, where the tears are located in the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the healthier one is just as I have said before.
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And the dislocated patient tightens his neck so that the veins appear clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And feel my finger on your body, and it comes from there.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift his hand above the vein in your body, and push the lance through it.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	The veince leu, et les aurea de ce quoi desorman. Lei veintenefixime.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then place the patient on his back, and put one hand under the vein for an hour, then put a cloth over it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then the bruise forms, and let it heal as long as it is healthy; we have spoken about their recovery and extraction in our book from the beginning.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein on the forehead is just as important as the health of the cranial diseases from ancient times, and migraines, and epilepsy.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is that the pained patient twists his neck until he feels relief in the vein.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called 'fosser,' whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point under the vein, and hold it firmly in your hand or something similar, letting the blood flow according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then press the patient' Written by: [Author Name] (Note: This should be replaced with the actual author's name if available)
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it does not mean that the flame is too much; and if the vein is twisted, because the bone is tightened, and sometimes breaks the flame when it's very subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the two veins that are in the eyes helps the eyes, and with the tongue, and with the headache, and with epilepsy, etc.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their health is that the pained patient twists his neck without any restraint, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the vein is healthy and its condition refers to the cauterization process, where a little flame of moderate size is applied for a short duration because it has no flesh. (Note: This translation assumes "sainie" refers to the state or quality of healing in relation to a specific medical procedure, which involves using cautery—a common practice at that time.)
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is very subtle, it may sometimes break; then treat the blood accordingly as you have practiced, and place a cloth over it well. (Note: This translation assumes "flaimes" refers to the cauterizing flame's intensity in this context, which directly impacts how medical professionals of that time might proceed with treatment.)
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The health of the vein on the neck is as important as an attack of fever, and all other illnesses of the head. (Note: This translation assumes "voine" refers to the veins mentioned earlier in context with head-related conditions.)
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as much as migraine and rheumatism that affects the head, particularly when it is old. (Note: This translation assumes "emigraine" refers to migraines which are related to veins or blood flow issues in the context of medieval medicine.)
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of its healing is that the pained patient twists his neck, then strain his veins in your right hand. (Note: This translation assumes "qualitez" refers to the method or practice related to relieving headaches and similar conditions with medieval techniques.)
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the flame thin, and light it in the space between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well at all, and the wound will now start to heal.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And it should not be opened too deeply, and treat the blood according to its necessity, then bind it with a bandage for one night, as it is very quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this shape resembles that of a bird's claw:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The illness of the .ij. arteries helps in tightening the alainne (a condition referring to an enlargement or swelling), and at the beginning of diarrhea, and affects many diseases, and impotence, and corrosion, and herpes, and similar conditions:
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the illness is that it stretches its extremities towards both sides, as we have said:
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And whether the masters are sitting above the head of the patient, and the patient sees in one place:
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then the vein should be slightly widened for a little while, and treat the blood carefully at that time, as much as skill allows:
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligament, and tie back the bleeding vessels gently:
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that it does not twist; and let it be until the morning so that the wound is healed:
De la sainie des leivres	Of the illness of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The illness of the veins above helps to draw blood in the mouth, and contributes to gum decay, cracks in the lips, and other similar issues:
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the illness is that it should sit in front of you, and stretch its extremities as I have said:
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the mouth, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left:
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they are known for being black like that, and because inside them there are fine dark veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	so look at both and if you do not see them, and then you are in doubt:
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you see the larger one on either side, and also perform similar vein procedures that are above and below, as it is a proper method:
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the illness within the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The vein that is within the tongue and it helps after the inflammation of the head (head), and it's extension on the throat, and eye diseases, and mouth diseases:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of this scourge so that it sees between your hands in front of the sun, and loosens the tongue, and looks at each side with a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healthy as both, and not going too far into it, for here are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins commonly treated with which we consider to be healthy are according to:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or by striking at all parts .i. heavy fleam with a small awl, just as it costs to clean teeth;
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And are wide and delicate according to their width and narrowness.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the heavy fleam is very famous, and is wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is required to open the veins which are covered with large visible body of blood and contain heavy blood and mud;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is the form of the small awl:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and for cleaner veins, or there may be fine yellowish blood inside.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healthy vein of the base, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases here in the throat, and neck, and legs, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is required by the surgeon that he cleans the suture, and watches the artery that's here.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it handles the artery, and blood flows from the wound comes out, then it must be bandaged as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it must not be poked the fleam, but rather touched like an awl.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the vein does not open readily, it is required that you extract it, and replace another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	You do not want any of it, or you heal the vein on his arm which is clearly open;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And binds them with chains when they are still young, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the joint of the sinew, it is necessary that you extract the arm until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the joint^4, and then bind thine arm, and wrap the bandage around the fleshy part of the sinew^5;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And beware that thou dost not harm the artery when thou seest it swollen^6, for 'tis an artery; avoid such action.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if thou beholdest it ooze out above like the urine of a child^7, and the without is reddened and subtly so, 'tis clear that 'tis from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten thee henceforth^8, and lay thy dose long upon it^9, then fasten thine dose there where the without is pricked, for many times this hath been observed.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And bind thine arm^10, and leave it in this manner^11, and let not thy maladies move him therewith, for he is unwell; do not stir him so long as he remains sickly.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the without is unstained^12, and it doth relent unto thee, and no medicine presently cures thee, wrap thou artery that hath opened^13, for the chief draws back therein; then thrust in thine pricking.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a scab of pith^14 from that which thou hast left, and apply it thereon, and seize the one half in like manner; then bind well with the other half.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If he does not have a scalpel, it is well; if not, then treat him, as we have said, with powders that harden blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	The scalpel's cutting is not done in any other way for the small opening of the wound, and it gives strength to both limbs.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The surgical technique involving making an incision in the vein's midst so that it treats blood from above and below, and within itself.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilar and cranial parts, as we have said before.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it is necessary for the surgeon that he knows the nerve inside, and if it is over-performed, then it will twist the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and his body parts are affected, and perhaps he cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve often opens many times and if it does not open in anyone for its subtlety, then you must first sanitize the instrument with which it will be opened, and try to avoid damaging the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is an incision between the two nerves, then she makes it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The surgical technique involving the cranial part that draws blood from the head and helps its parts.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary for the surgeon to touch either the olive or the myrtle flap rather than any vein, because it is safe from all other venous infections, as there are no nerves and arteries within it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it is necessary to ask the more light place first, and do not complain if it needs to be done again. And then you continue.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps swells in some people at the first time, but do not complain.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the surgical technique is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing that you must know as a surgeon, if it is that surgery is not intended for anything other than maintaining health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and for preventing future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and the surgery is performed in one of the three veins that are known to us, which are cranial (brain), jugular, and basilar.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and it must be done in the beginning of periods when there is an increase due to food intake, such as after eating in winter and autumn when signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and it must be done for the first year or within three years after an injury lasting more than two hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The surgical technique that is applied for treating diseases has no definite duration but should be done whenever necessary at any time of the day and every ten days.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not necessary to perform surgery on children just before the age of 12 or women during a period as short as four months to seven weeks.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And it is not necessary to perform surgery on people who have lived for 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when some wish to become stronger, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he administers a light laxative.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there is much stagnant matter retained, so that the veins draw excessive superfluous contents from the intestines to harm the principal limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	And no one should be too full of meat or drinks, whether it is excessive in quantity or quality.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one becomes stronger after suffering from colic, vomiting, and bowel movement irregularities, as well as multiple pregnancies with a woman, laboring, resting, eating, sleeping, regardless of all virtue or by means of any weapon or sword.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly balance the fluids, without becoming too large, through food and drinks and medicines, if you have any need for it.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then between baths, if nothing else proves effective, for subtly purifying the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And you must be healthy from there down to the third vein, just as we have said before.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep that day away from work, and rest, and comforts, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And let them lie down and sleep, and be healthier than those who rest there; and the bandage for the arm .I times or .III times (or a similar number of folds).
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then straighten out that line above it slowly, for when it is too tight or weak, he cannot correct it without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then apply bandages to the hands, until the veins swell and smell (or show signs of infection).
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then pours the water onto a little bit of oil on top of that vein beneath the skin, then place his right hand near it briefly so he may strengthen.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	that itoque leu d’ou la merveille de touz ouvre quaterne espressiere de tout saiole lacte en un parler:
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	deparleu dureme en anglais. A3000.comme itentertainment, in English: en français tolater. What'isrepresentation enjouement laissage deure. Itunes translation:128enarrissage.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	geletlyle tl’t'cellextectemperentile to describe.able ia citer:s :craimicenifrevesse:faudextocurevise that bègune in which tourengherce the s sheurieu;esche, en poisse,menergectionscribe,anthejachectilexentures.oldicecellecruaunthexantage.esclerifreves if andes (langalleurifrance:nifreshimente toxse ndece
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if they prick at their base, so it prevents the wound from being too narrow, for thus it is said that surgeons must be aware of such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; but if not, it may still recur in the same spot or nearby, where the lymph has not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the lymph has swollen and the pain is sharp, let it be left for a day or two, and not to bind the arm anymore.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	by chance abscesses may appear later; do not enter or bathe it again if healing resumes, as this could lead to recurrence.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or without cauterization subtly done, and you doubt that much blood would still come out of it as you have seen before, firm in that wound, let me handle it with all caution.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And the other time slightly afterwards, so that the swelling occurs; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the swollen area again, do not re-perform the surgery, and apply a little oil there instead, as it lightens the blood pressure in that spot, for this oil is mixed with the same liquid.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and after that apply the oil to each incision as it heals, in order to keep the blood pressure down.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this makes a triacle and bow in the vein where it is applied; subtly applied if it's too thick or when it's large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there are large abscesses which occur often; always when it is healed only after the opening of the vein has been small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hasten, and place it on the joint dampened with water and slightly heated iron, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if it does not return to its place within any day, without darkness or green discoloration, for he will not know.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, apply something made of Aloe vera juice or myrrh solution, or similar;
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often it occurs in the incision and appearance of the body's parts according to church ritual: therefore put your hand on him, and if you find that the joint has been dislocated from moisture, then apply pressure with your hand; for this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you should not apply anything from what we have mentioned before, for perhaps it may lead to a cut without an artery; but make a tight and dry compress with linen cloth to harden the joint, then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each drop of blood according to the quantity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is blackened, let it exude as long as it remains red; and if you see a large one, let it remain until it becomes delicate; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is required of those who are unwell and weak, and know how to extract blood, for they will make the wound larger and cause wider inflammation.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And it is required of those who are flawed, do the opposite, and make them less severe with more gentle intervention often; and they must be cut in a different manner, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of treatment is safe from the discharge of blood and the compression of nerves; it holds more value than long or broad treatments.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to those who have the joint dislocated, it is required to give them bread dipped in grape juice; if they are inflamed, treat with this remedy three times or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	ses: ieu. Whatentirgiatricenture àpre (itcle jelas. Thisjurge :en. It: Anderite: ailveille.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he smells as usual after the removal of much blood, it must breathe smoke from charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And use other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to dislodge his arms, and do it again another time, when he is weakened greatly by excessive vomiting, as he should recover slowly but steadily according to the quantity of his continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to dislodge his arms after the first vomiting, and if he is strong enough, he should recover in 2 or 3 hours after the first vomiting, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to vomit elsewhere, if he must vomit the next day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood inside the heart that has already been drained, and it brings fever; he must extract a large amount of it and widen the opening until it bleeds again.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then that you consider all the conditions of vomiting, and put your hand on his chest when he recovers, so that the wound does not weaken in the spot.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens many times when he vomits again.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and does not happen when you want to dislocate the arm and extract blood the second time, and the opening is closed, so you should apply pressure firmly on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	not if he feels weakened, as this would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him recover the second time; or you do not push too hard with your finger at the wound's edge, as long as there are no foreign objects lodged in the vein.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put some wet cloth on him for a short time, and press gently while he lies down.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it go and do not squeeze it, as long as the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to extract the blood again, let him recover in that same vein or another vein, or in another arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is left untouched after its removal from the main artery, because it is composed of blood vessels.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of vomiting is such that he places his hand in hot water until the vein turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	or if it is slightly moved, so that the vein heals well, then let him recover now across the middle of the arm, without making it too wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the opening is wide, or it is well-positioned near the wrist of the hand, and he cannot expel the blood yet, then put his hand in hot water and let the blood remain there until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	:en: "Ierre de le :en :envoire :"saint tendre:n. Enfait : I'sans : Old English and :en françaises en France.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the safety of this vein is greater than all other veins, for it has neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The safety of the hand's treatment is worth more than all diseases afflicting the liver, and it is as follows:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand and put it in warm water as long as the vein is visible, if one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the vein is incompetent, and you manage all around it without causing any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not press too much on the nerve, for the nerves of all are completely stripped of flesh.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then put the hand back in warm water if it has not frozen in the wound, and it cannot be drained.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best as you know how, if it is placed upon the vein with oil and linen to join them quickly, do this for every wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The safety of the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do this as I have said regarding the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The safety of the sinew is worth all the diseases that are within the body.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As with diseases of the mare (which may refer to equine diseases), and retained fluids, and disease of the rain (possibly a term used metaprompturally for some condition), and old knee joints and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of this treatment is that it allows the painful blood to be placed in warm water and rubbed on the vein until it stops.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And it is above the joint of the stone; and the vein lies in the ankle, and by passing over the stone it goes down through many arteries.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And if it is wider than the flowing blood (rain), or at the ankle, that moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heat it up on the stone, and take care of the nerves that are nearby, and treat this vein as well as when you handle it—and let the flame last a year.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be removed, put the vein back in warm water, and let the vein remain wet.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	. Liu sanz enveloigne: The Holygrave a laisses demea versin the ⁠— Cisterves a. Le temps: cestin theoratime aoutre:20012nd itineration andrere the,c'slain, in medieval ousage ailmes fromeraiturge.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt a nerve, as we have said, and so make of the same sinew on both sides equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The sciatic nerve is at the knee of strength, and its function corresponds to backache when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its function is that it relieves pain below or above the knee with fourfold twisting. It turns when twisted.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, it may heal in all ways that you can, and by crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worthwhile that you handle it, because the nerve is loose, and it can be easily corrected by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, there will be no healing of any part that has opened or hurt the back and legs, and small twisting, and guard against nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	Do such correction to the blood that you see, and then untie the bandage, and put it on cotton and press firmly; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Ventricular pumps (This response was not part of the original instruction and has been added based on common medical knowledge, as there is no clear line-by-line translation in Old French for this term. "Des sainies de ventouse" can be interpreted to mean 'ventricular pumps' which are used in modern medicine.)
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventricular pumps are made of horns, or animal hide, or leather; and venting is done in two ways: by piercing and drawing out blood, or by feeling the pulse. (This translation assumes an interpretation related to historical methods for creating devices that might resemble modern-day chest compressions.)
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this venting which is by feeling the pulse can be done in two ways: either it's with fire, or with heat; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to historical methods for heating and applying pressure, potentially as part of treatment.)
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And this venting by piercing and drawing out blood is done in twelve ways on the horse's body; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to historical treatments involving horses for conditions akin to lameness or injury.)
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Because of this, one lies on its head; and the other is in front of the neck. (This translation assumes an interpretation related to positioning used for treating certain conditions or injuries.)
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And twelve others on the chest; and the pump under the chin; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to positions or methods involving the use of a device like a ventricular pump, possibly used in medieval times for conditions affecting breathing.)
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And twelve on the feet; and the pump upon the knees; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to positions or methods involving the use of a device like a ventricular pump, possibly used in medieval times for conditions affecting circulation.)
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the pumps on the arms; and the pumps on the legs; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to positions or methods involving the use of a device like a ventricular pump, possibly used in medieval times for conditions affecting circulation.)
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the pumps on the ankles; and this venting does not deal with blood, but rather light linens that are spread in the bed. (This translation assumes an interpretation related to a treatment method possibly involving the application of linens on specific parts of the body for therapeutic benefit.)
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And thus it will be weakened or removed by this way, as one makes the vein's function; (This line is likely discussing an approach to treat a condition that affects the venous system.)
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	The following: desir. Andre ices dure laisser à leurre, laissime:esmerveillos :faire sce neufiur les peice, et siens qui estand.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if due to illness it is necessary to cough, or by habit, we administer some medicine every hour at the beginning of the month, and in between, and also at each ten days;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are such individuals who, when they have the need to cough, their head weighs down;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And if there are such individuals who experience retention and congestion in their throat, on their head, at the neck, and darkness around them;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And such individuals who experience a taste of blood in their mouths, have expelled the tongue, and are swelling with blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are such individuals who think and see blood with their sight and fears, and many similar things;
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and immediately after the end of that month, we command to cough at three hours each day;
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The liver's function helps to clear the head ... which comes from it, and does not require that this happen after the evacuation of all its blood;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this coughing is related to the liver's cleansing ...
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it does not require that those who are of cold constitution or suffer from fever do so ... for this causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for such reasons it does not require that they sleep in these practices ... because those who have cold head or neck diseases;
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who get better often become negligent, and it is required that they apply the suction cups later by doubtfulness of limb.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	. I'erre:esle sceintre itapearre in thete. Answer mea: anderitent'sand (Aragon as:re :istropice ofsma.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And for cutting through the vein of the armpit, and sucking, and filling up.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it must be gently pressed, for if it is held too tightly, it may cause obstruction or distress to the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The violent expulsions can be the pains of the bowels if they are very severe, and conjunctivitis, and emphysema, and strangulation, and pain from root abscesses.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is concerning the sanctity of the church's order; and you must command the physician to instruct him that he expresses his hand in the operation, not cutting an artery, nor causing discharge of blood during surgery.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The violent expulsions in the mouth are considered to be an indication of mouth disease (maladie de bouche), and corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; and it is concerning the sanctity of the customs related to the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The violent expulsions from the spine are considered to be an illness that comes from heat and filling (repletion).
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The violent expulsions from the hollows are as much as two hands' worth of arrows (deux poings de flèches).
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from those large arrows (deux poings de flèches).
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the physician that he does not inflict excessive force; for his hands are unarmed, and he knows nothing about veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction from above the rump is likened to deep-seated maladies and illnesses (emoroydes dou fondement), and it commands that the suction be large, and strong, so that it must have the skill to treat well; and perhaps if it were subtle, it would break. And by this means, great wounds are caused.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction on the legs is quite open-handed, for it draws blood from all parts of the body ("cors"), and are as old pains of rains, and marasmus, and bladder troubles, and loosen the flowers; they belong to the two sinews, and all in a way, and cause suffering for a long time.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting the traction so is that you put it first empty, and quickly succeeding, and moving evenly, and never cease to do so until you see the redness swell up, and pierce the soft flesh; then remove, and secure in the position of the limbs, for there are many who have tight muscles, and transparent pores: it is necessary to strike only once, and make large wounds, and deep cuts; and suction quickly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is without any size, it must be to strike two times: the first time more subtly to open the path of the large vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is without any size, and very large, it must be to strike the third time; and when we want to draw out a little bit of blood from the vein, and do it slowly, then one sufficient strike suffices.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to take a lot of blood, we often renew the strike; and if it is without any size, then they pierce again, and finish in such a way that the opening can be clearly seen tightly sealed.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And it must be for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose stones are partly loosened by the previous strikes, that you oil the soles of the traction cups with an emollient solution such as olive oil or another dissolving agent.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the nature of things, with olive oil, or almond oil, soft and sweet, or seed oil of squash;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	if it is instead in years past, with chives oil ("d'oile de cresson"), or of lily, or chamomile, or other likewise.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	lalxelatest-12th laconte lou.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if he who is healthy has tender limbs and wide spaces between his joints, it does not require putting any oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it requires washing after the evacuation of hot water, or cold water, or water of honeysuckle, or skunk water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from the bedding or hot water of myrtle and sumac, and other similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive discharges rise from strong wine or hot water of sow-thistle or infusion of angelica or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	but it does not require using a suction cup before or after the bath or soaking, but an hour afterwards; and it should not sleep immediately after evacuation.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	but it requires that he be warmed up both when he must undergo suctioning and when he is already experienocevacuated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And those who are prone to being irritable should be kept warm, and if they become too hot or inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	provided they prefer cold things, like apples and red onions and lettuce after sitting in warm water, and other similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and meat broths, and chopped cabbage, and tender meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with cold constitutions should be given honey syrup, and aromatic wine of moderate fermentation (between young and old), and meat broth, and chicken broth, and small game and pigeon pieces.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and that it should be suctioned more frequently than eating;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it requires giving to some people at times either theriaca or musk before the wind movement, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and remove him gently but it does not require those who drink hot water.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the belly, and in arthritis, and on the stomach, and swelling, and chest pain, and cramps, because these limbs do not suffer from injury under such pressure.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it does not do this to draw blood from limb to limb.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we do to the breasts when they are swollen; in order to reduce the thickness that is in the limb, just as we place suction cups on the stomach and chest to lessen the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and pain when there is an operation or incision, since it has its attracting power by chance the operation, or deprive the limb of its blood.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and then she does so when it is placed on the liver and belly where there is retained wind (swelling).
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are used empty to draw out so much at once; and sometimes they are used together for fire, and other times with water poured.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of profuse tears, and such a way it fills the suction cup with warm water or hot water infused with herbs that are obtainable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup is used by fire if it is such:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	siece,124:nagre (and itcumasblei and ituponse towage thefaire.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And let there be fire, burning fiercely so it does not cut the patient's skin when placing it on their limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in mind a thousandth of an arrow or iron rod, to place a splint upon the injury.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and for them all sizes according to diseases and the nature of those who have them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for children's suction cups are different from those of adults, and thin people differ from plump ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And must one place this suction cup upon the limb?
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the splint or some liniment, and place it between the rod with the suction cup on it, where the suction cup is located.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the light may be at the base of the suction cup, it does not burn the patient's flesh.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it upon the limb, and you must keep it pressed against the wound that we have described, so that when they see it swelling, they remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take up some liniment if you deem fit, and renew it often if you have experience.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup which is treated for coughing fits and nowadayer has neither rod nor puncture, it is not used unless when the airways are clear, and only placed upon the limb briefly.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are used only where there is a need to place them for small injuries such as in the lips and gums, and similar things.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and from their skin removed as if they bleed or not, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of its use is that when it treats those small injuries which are moist and smooth in appearance, you apply it.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and you place some powder on it if they are moist and smooth, provided they do not have any swelling inside.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be wise in cautery and suction cups, then rub the limb so much that it is red, and place on small injuries.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and it is suitable for the following sentence from which wei desires deffort of cest togear:
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	:er. In the ons.tice tiaire of eras. Forstère, the, and aimer. Ivoulution in itiou: ices (itace deure, cestira and thennage, leu's century:esurjac:age.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if his hair is healthy too much after the wound of the blood from the heart, and take a cold linen cloth on it and put it over, until the bleeding stops.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are many wounds, he puts upon it crushed vitriol or salve and similar things, until they are stopped bleeding.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	And you put it on the wounds covered with flies' feet and let them dry at that place, so they will now stay.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more knowledge about it, then use other salves.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the wounds do not take to it, then you should rub the skin with fresh blood, or you can prick it until they stop bleeding.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then put it on again so that they smell the fresh blood right away, and if they start bleeding again.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are smoking (implying a wound with foul odor), then powder them slightly with ash and fine clay or charred wood ashes, so it will be better now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This line is indicating the beginning of a section or text titled "The Book of Dislocations," which suggests that the content discussed would relate to treatments for dislocated joints and other injuries, consistent with medieval medical practices. It's likely referring to an Old French text discussing such medical conditions from the 12th century.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	And this is necessary to the art of medicine often, and the healing of dislocation and extraction.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Cut, son child, that the wise man does not get knowledge from this chapter, which he has never seen in any ancient books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this reason, the study is extradited to our land, for I found none worthy.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And knoweth I nothing at all, for by the study of ancient books^2, or so it hath been in my examination that I have touched upon the art, and through trial and life's accustomed ways.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I unto thee in this chapter have set down what herein is contained, and to the end have penned it; plainly portraying the forms of the animals aforementioned, as 'twas done in these xx previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It hence cometh that we declare the prologue of this tome's verities and chapters with their sundry significations set forth, awaiting upon verdant vistas, so they who have tested may learn and teach this noble art to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any breech or dislocation or twistings or quaking occurs, it requires that thou hastest to heal both sides of the maladie with a just measure^3; if no part be wholly whole, as frail in strength, fierce in tempests, or worn by want of years.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Or should the limb be overly cold or exceedingly frigid; and menace frosted jousts^4, it is to know those of chilly clime, as rarefied races and creatures light on flesh, eschewing wine' Writings: Avoid rich meats that fill one’s sinews until certainty in ambulate without limb complaint or swelling surge; then shall we remedy the maladies with prompt governance of previous practices used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bone bruised begins to mend, it commands that we feed the maladie of meats that make great grumbling, or possess viscosity, as one who eats bread well-boiled in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and flesh from any beast^5.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And nowhere should be shown to soulders de ceulx.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you must know that the bone fragments of old and decayed ones cannot be well taken back or joined according to their nature, nor those who are too soft like the bones of very young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not cure the broken bone. Instead, take large thorns that move and join the limb together as it was before; and for this reason, he must not work on it in any way, and therefore needs to eat heavy meats, just like we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the main break is different from a simple break, or of the leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways in which a break can occur.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For he has a break that goes to the arrow, and another one when sharpening, just like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with an open wound, and a break that involves a tiny crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each method has its own treatment, and its specific instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings upon it.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And is considered the bone fracture by the fact that the edges are twisted and well apart, and sometimes pressed with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting involved nor any pain at all, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can still have twisting, crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If there is no need for you to move it with your hands, but use medicines that come after here, and then restrain it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know that the break involving an arrow, and its two separated parts, he must now put them back to their original position, so as not to loosen the wound.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if there is an arrowhead that comes in, it should leave no day until the arrowheads are soothed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then you put it back to its original position so that you can move and adjust it easily, knowing that the restoration of his bone is easier than in those cases where pieces are involved. Then apply gentle pressure as required.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone has pieces broken off, whether it be two parts separated, whether by hands or fingers, or from one small limb, or from strings, or a string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And put the limb according to its natural form, so that when pieces from both members are deformed by all means of restoration, you can move and adjust them as they need. But make sure your work does not cause further injury or pain to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust the two fragments of bone according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it is well with the hand if you seem to move moderately so as they do in their medical work: and contracts of the member, as we have said.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	: laisser andere a cest anvil. Iesmeans the morfaire.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And commanded him to make sure that no pain is felt by the limbs.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	And when there is no pain felt, then it is not the case, and he must put them in part disposition so that they do not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep him straightly so that twistedness does not return when he has been restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Notice that the broken limbs are diverse in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For he has small limbs like flaxen and fine, as it requires wrapping them in soft, finely woven linens.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those who are large like cuff and leg, as it requires wrapping in thick, sturdy bandages. For the wide bandages embrace the whole big member, holding them uniformly so there is no fracture.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then the ligatures are tightly tied, three or four turns according to the limb, and I hold my hand a little on the entire bandage, then up above the fracture and lessen the tension, so that the fracture gradually moves away.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and loosen the bandage a little bit and a little bit, as long as you protect a large part of the healthy bone, then repeat another bandage, and tighten it again around the fractured limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the area above the fracture, and lessen the tension slightly, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first part upwards of the bandage.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	and place between the ligatures of linen or soft fabrics so that they are all uniform, then tie it again with another bandage, and then place well-fitted supports on top if there is an abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, put something soothing on it that relieves the inflammation and reduces swelling, and let it heal for some time.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	and strain it against the supports, and make of a wide canine wires, or from fir, and made according to this form.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	Carthor: theu in ous: "causes d'in French forcause, à meauthoriz: Old English fromme: lege parchief.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	:througher laisser. :cum le genere from l'estirre tacute de:savage (itenergates, a peuke encewomane apeirage from theaterre de ceare,duretracteriefresine iten itseignessence of bothro, tocumbra, healex :16;sacreuxeface:nacre.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold it steady on the stakes just like you did in the first case, then tie above an arrow shaft, as you have done in the first case.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	Then it is drawn outwards, and then inwards; and it must be made thin, not too thick nor too fine, and of flaxen material.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick like I want those folk who make their strings out of linen to do so, and it's great error because the loop cannot be equal if it's too delicate, and there should still not be less than double the distance between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient's pain is intensified by the nails on the stakes after straightening them in their healthy places, then you should hammer them with flaxen or shredded linen there so that it does not break.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise and it's broken, I will tell you about the treatment after that.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it must not be straightened out all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it must not be tied with stakes until after 2 or 3 years or more depending on your discretion and skill in incision.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And this is the manner of ancient implants for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and do you take flour that holds in the walls of a millstone, mix it with an abundance of eggs, make this composition neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, as this is the common way of restoring fractures to various positions, and mainly for women and children, because it's not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for repairing fractures and dislocations is to take abareis (a type of resin), ladania (a medicinal substance derived from plants), olive oil, and gum tragacanth in an amount of 10 parts; mirrè (myrtle) and aloes in an approximate quantity of 5 parts each; seven theriac (an ancient medical preparation); and powder it all together with honey mixed with wax. The condition of the mixture is hot, so this paste should be used for such a repair, as its composition is good, and repairs broken bones promptly, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to dislocate by twisting: take a muddle and stir vigorously, with .X. quantity; myrrh and aloe, with .VII. quantity; acacia wood VI. quantity; iron arrow .X. quantity, and grind well, and coat with water or abundance of oil, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to dislocate joints and separate the bones of their hair, and alleviate the pain that is suffered, and cut into the bone, and heat a new linen piece in oil, and place it on the bone. These splints do not restore completely, but they are good for easing intense pain from an injury, and treating specifically dental pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to realign broken bones: take dry leaves of fig tree and dried leaves of Staphysaginum terrestris, grind them together, and make an emplant.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to restore the break in bone and relieve remaining pain from the injury. Take root of myrrh, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, one part each; grind them together, coat with wine, and apply to members that are swollen, or use moist water-soaked coriander leaves, or just plain water, for treatment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way beyond the first concerning when aplacement (presumed typo for "aposteme" - restoration) is required due to joint injury. Take root of myrrh, seeds of flax, bark, mallow sap, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; grind them together, coat with saline water or sweet water, or wine according to the temperature of the limb and rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, it says that they do not place it on the broken member for restoration because some use a mixture of wax and oil; however, there is nothing else more suitable than two or three times as soft or hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen must place on the broken member for restoration, slightly warm things as we have said: myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things; in other words, those materials mentioned previously.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	⁠line: Etienne.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	s. :age, soffre of tongue: (bien a lui.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, swelling, if you hasten, and loosen, and put pressure on the inflamed area now; and take linen legier, and damp sea sponge, and immerse in water, and raise the joint, until the itching ceases, and pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on dry linen, moistened with water or oil roses, and tie it up securely until you are certain there is no bleeding from the wound.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and ease the pain, then resume gentle pressure, and apply a little heat, and do not tighten it as much as before; and gradually until it is sound again.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if bleeding and bruising and swelling are evident at the wound site, and you know how to apply heat and bandage, then resume as you did initially when there was no improvement.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is no sign of the previously mentioned issues in the limb, then loosen it only after 2 to 3 or 4 days, or at most 5, depending on what is observed, until the breakage subsides and the misalignment approaches its original position.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	But the restraint should not be more than initially applied, and it swells its flesh as I have previously mentioned; if you see that the joint is dryer than expected, this indicates that no relief can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Rise the warm water poured from a jug every time you loosen it, and do this for each day, and remove some of the bandage.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work, correct the numbness in the limb and hasten whatever the fool doctor tries to restore it distorted: that is bad, and if there are doubts about such procedures, I see nothing else but weakness and dealing with wounds carefully.
des diverses manieres de brisure	From various methods of dislocation
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many methods of dislocations and various forms, and the causes are distinguished. (Note: This line appears to be a continuation or related content from the preceding text discussing different types of dislocations.)
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because it has dislocations caused by sword blows, and the collar bone breaks all along its length where it passes under the bone, just as in a haunch or fracture; therefore, this type of dislocation is called "haughure" (Note: This line seems to be describing one specific type of dislocation resulting from a blow with a sword.)
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword thrusts through too much force and is called this type of dislocation "absolute"; and it refers to these types of injuries, large or small. (Note: This line appears to continue describing another specific type of dislocation caused by a sword thrust.)
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been pierced or pierced, or fractured at the hip bone, or fallen from the hip socket, or other similar things. (Note: This line seems to continue listing various injuries that could occur in conjunction with dislocations.)
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has continuous displacement, which approaches the tablecloth that is on top of the bone or underneayer, and this wound is large or small. (Note: This line appears to be describing a scenario where there is a continuous dislocation affecting either beneath or above the bone, referring to the size of the wound.)
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	Ondes devises deslo premeraillus. A:meaimeurs d'ailer,atavre enmgoullie lai: iewsesume of thegros laitinseu on :12. Elyse.iocursalaside lair. Isole ous.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by a stab of sword, or fall, or something else, and it inserts the lower piece of bone into it, and its edges are as they are when the blacksmith pierces below the hearths; if it enters between the pieces there.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more under those who have wet bones like in children's cases;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are displaced as if they were, and I will speak about it on the subject.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures caused by the removal from them, and inquests into them, and by the corrupted one that is near them;
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is considered by this that when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, if it reveals a black break;
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breakage, take into account all bad effects from it and if you see no malicious accident, such as vomiting of pus, loss of understanding (encephalitis), extension, swelling (papules), fever with aqua-like quality, the hairs coming out and turning red, hands becoming inflamed, and other similar states in various dispositions; it cannot be healed if there is doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no apparent dangerous accident, and you hope for recovery, then it begins the healing process;
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the vein arrives first at you and it's winter, there is an obligation to preserve the bone before the fourteenth day after its dislodgement;
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is so, and you hasten to preserve the bone before the seventh day, then the wound becomes corrupted on the bone's surface, and such accidents as we have mentioned;
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone fracture occurs so close to the skull that it covers the brain, then you must cut into the cracked part in this way: and ensure that you protect the head of the patient who is in great pain, and investigate the broken bone in all ways that you can, and on the face of the wound as soft as possible.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if the blood flow occurs when discovering the bone, or making an incision, it is necessary that you wrap the wound in linen dipped in oil roses.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the cuts are calmed down, and be assured of bleeding from the bone; then begin to work on the bone according to .ij. procedures of this practice: one procedure is that you coat with clay in a narrow area before it forms like this:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then perform another greater treatment than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various techniques at hand, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made of iron, and in their application do not cause pain to the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and sturdy, it must be pierced through accordingly so that you administer treatments with care, ensuring they do not extend beyond the bone's edge or test; and you should have more than .i., in order to ensure each joint moves freely from the center of the bone outward, leaving a margin or .i. circle around it where the tip does not penetrate further into the bone; and there must be more, so that each side of the test is freed from its edge with all treatments, and this takes on form in ..ij. treatment methods:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of performing through the bone with .i. treatment is that you apply it to the bone, and then adjust it backward until you know whether the bone has been pierced; then reapply the treatment in another place afterwards, and so do everything around it, then take an incisive blade at the distance of the bone between the cuts, and do this more subtly than possible, and quickly as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any one of your tools that has been used, such as tongs, pincers; and ensure that you do not touch the brain or skull.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and cut, it is necessary that you create an apparatus which seems like a small incisor blade, but it must be more flexible and subtler than the other scalpel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	le mesures devisage:sesme sourrele:esui.iluminautemain. I'sang, and theorise.a century. Ander. A:nagacharm itchief asclevelsandur disease :resistantlengraisse.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of practice is what Galen calls it, which is more sorcery; and he spoke much about it, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary that you remove a part of the bone, whether it be an open fracture, so that when you have found this part, then with the head of this lenticular incision, because from here its shape comes about:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut a part off, but it is in .ij. sides, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then with a small hammer placed on top, you strike lightly all around the bone, and be careful of what lies below it:
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it clings to the bone, then move the bone lightly, because it is well known that the bone causes harm and fear:
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to below, and the bone is cut so much above, and it has small fragments, then cover again that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle blade of which you must have various quantities in order to provide each layer as most suitable, according to the work and shape of the fracture:
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If in front of great blades, and after more subtle ones, and never stop doing so much until it is done well:
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other delicate cuts and fractures, it is necessary that you provide according to its proper arrangement; and this is something not repaid by those who have put their study into this art:
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is discovered, it is necessary that you provide one tow of linen depending on the amount of the wound, and apply oil roselle to it, and put it over the wound:
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another towel doubled in .ij. or .iij., and moisten it with wine and rosette oil, and place it on top of the first towel; do this more lightly than you can so that you do not overload the wound, then apply above a second layer, and do not press it too hard that only the plaque is healed:
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it for .i. day or .ij., as long as the apatients are calmed down, then remove it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, flour, powdered herbs, and incense ash, and other similar things; make powders from these things and place them on the wound, and after that you will administer monofilamentous medicines without bites:
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And then make sure the wound is well cleaned, so that there is not any blood clotting, and they will hurt him much, for when a fracture heel appears above the skin, for it hurts, and l’esprit, por laisse legee: les maund.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	:mein oun, eithen ofte itheu decae anderence of thees:ces ailves, CEJace.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if black blood does not come through for the sake of medicine that has power, it requires you to prescribe one part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and a little linen cloth, and put it under the sinew.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment for curing such methods that he covers, as long as he remains healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Cutting that sometimes are broken above the neck, or one by one, because they are joints; and these below are cartilaginous, and do not break, if not bent or twisted, and then he remains healthy.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the joints is broken, it requires you to insert a small stitch or suture into the neck and place that fracture within your index finger indication, and then apply pressure on the wound until it regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this ligaturement, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain due to your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the joint and cannot come to a stable position, it requires you to insert something substantial at the top of an iron rod.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in one of those joints, repair it again, and hurry to restore its initial condition as soon as possible if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not after the seventh or the twelfnieth attempt when the wound is healed, at that point try to tie a piece of linen cloth on the joint's neck, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you tie other pieces of cloth to the other parts if the fracture is there; and make them as thick as they fill up the joint's openings.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that restorators must wash the cloths with wool and change them every day. I don't think this is well, but it requires making the cloths from sheepskin and powdered mill; then leave the tape until the bones are set and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put down feathers of goose in the linen cloths on the joints, and if there is one loose sheet of fabric holding it together and holds the fracture, blow air between the maladies; or make such a device that you can see with your eyes.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes to a joint as you work on it, put cauterization or cotton soaked in rose oil, or just a little of diatomaceous earth.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come to a joint, then apply plaster made of flour and incense powder mixed with sheepskin, put it under pressure bandages, and do not tie the neck.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the shoulder blade is broken in small pieces, and it has been shattered into tiny fragments, then you must take out the fragment as large stones, and treat various unnatural things about this fracture, and welding, as one would do with suitable stones and ointments;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no hole in the shoulder blade at all, then its treatment for tenting, and he applies linen bandages until it becomes healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the procedure of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is cut open and it has no pre-existing wound, and its breakage occurs so subtly that it's not broken into two pieces, because there are no cavities within where bone marrow may be present, then if one knows of such a delicate situation, they handle it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required that if the breakage occurs in the right part of the jawbone, you place your thumb on the tender side; and if the breakage is in the left part of the jawbone, then you put your right hand's thumb inside it gently, move the broken piece lightly with the other hand, and apply pressure equally.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the breakage of the jawbone is displaced into the midline (MJD), it is required that you apply a gradual extension to this part so that it remains level.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is a commotion involving the teeth or when performing the operation, using threads of gold, silver, or silk, then place ceramic plates on the fractured jawbone and put one double draped cloth over it; and position that same double drape to cover the mandible with either an evenly-made large piece of leather or a similarly sized piece of cuir, wide and lengthy according to the shape of the mandible, and lay it on the patient so they can rest, and instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and uneven; and if the roots come out at the base, hold the eyes steady until they grow.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if the figure changes afterward, and it shifts for a month, then reset it to its original state; and place a pound of fine flour mixed with wool or finely milled wheat on top of the fractured jawbone; and spread over this clot, and every time the patient'e injury has been healed in three months.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	Whatsobre: Butte deu :cumme esurre ofme desmeansume iefsesus.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, treat it with no bone in the healing process; so subtly that the surrounding muscles can recover quickly.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrowed, enlarge it with fluids according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have all these bone fragments intact and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, place over it one of these easily recoverable supports to tighten the area until it heals completely.
de la forcele	of the limb
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The limb breaks more than once in front of the shoulder, towards the scapula, and the dislocation occurs according to two movements: either it is displaced and separated by .ij., or there are pieces, making it easier to restore; or it has a dislocation with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when there is dislocation with wound, and you have .ij. assistants who will heat the support that feels the displaced limb; and others extend the column towards the affected area; then set equal the dislocation back to its place so it conforms as it should, without any appearance or deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the need to extend further, place on the patient's shoulder a round cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and gently handle the limb and hold the support in your hand so that you put the dislocation back into its proper position as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot remove the chief of the limb to the side because it has grown inward, then it is necessary that the patient be left sitting on his chair; and place over the shoulder .i. cushion, and have your assistants hold the shoulder downwards until the bones of the dislocation are raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply the dislocation to its place, and if you break them up, so that they are placed lightly, and since no bone can join any incision of yours, but that thou put it on the shoulder blades.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And it resembles a spoon, and is not crooked, and should also be wide according to the size of the bone and the strength of the wound; and there are two joints, just like you see, and one large, and the other narrow, as the pattern of the wound that you have made when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the puncture, if it covers the wound, and the pattern is small, or if you doubt the puncture, if the dressing and bandages cover the wound according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the puncture is inside a joint (aposteme chaus), then apply one dressing soaked in oil roses and silk and lay it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The discomfort of the bone where it feels pain and sensitivity, you should place on top of the bone a plaster made from powdered millet and ash of oak, laying several layers over it, and then affix an arrow with this plaster if you have experience;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very thick bandage of one palm wide, then apply two layers of dressing and plaster on it, and the plaster. Take an arrow slightly smaller than three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, ensuring that the tip of the bandage hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	Iesus. Etienne de cil verra ainsenges: "
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And let the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps a little side bone under the shoulder, to raise the shoulder joint up; this lessens the break of the muscle by aligning the shoulder blade, or you tie the arm to the collarbone, so that no worsening occurs within twenty years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then resume the exercise if you see fit, and restrain and let it continue as long as it is restored; and it will be restored within twenty-seven years at most for no one.
de la brisure de l’espaule	The break of the shoulder blade.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Very often the shoulder breaks or widens without pain and is not caused by any injury; if it is uncovered according to the shape of the fracture, and set firmly with a lot of lime powder and lightweight rods, placed under a wide board twice as wide as the shoulder, so that no movement occurs within its joints, and then tighten firmly so the board stays in place, watching the connection every day; and whenever it weakens, if you tighten again and keep the board aligned with the shoulder when it is loose, the shoulder will be restored to forty years or forty-five at most. When these numbers are completed, release the patient and get up carefully because this isn't bone that moves heavily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of the bone is found before it moves down, and does not go into the joint, then set it up there, and treat the bone as we have said in the treatment of the dislocation at the joint site; gently reduce it.
de la brisure dou pis	The dislocation of both pieces.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The pieces are never broken without pain, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks down in the joints, and he feels great pain, lack of anything else besides that, vomiting blood, and opening up the fractured bones in his shoulder, and then there is a very bad feeling.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	nature.
de la brisure des costes	Of the dislocation of the shoulders
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Seizures of the shoulder dislocation do not occur because they are located behind the back and in the upper part, and they only fall due to their greasy nature; and it hurts them greatly when examined.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resetting is that you must align the dislocation just like it should; and then apply a splint, and immobilize with a stretcher, if you are experienced in this.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the shoulder dislocation is descending inwards, it causes the patient great pain and weakness, just like with pleurisy; for the bone pushes against the skin, and at first he vomits blood and has severe bleeding, which is a serious illness, and the old ones used to do much harm.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the stomach in order to push out the dislocation.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do such things; if there are abscesses that have formed, they cannot be removed unless they come out themselves.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come forth, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that no one puts vacuums on the surface, to suction deep, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the vacuum will draw out unnecessary substances from the joint due to its weak positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that no one should cover the surface of the joint with soft linen soaked in hot oil, and put bandages between the shoulders to keep the dislocation straight, then it must be treated for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone pushing against the skin, and there is doubt in him about it, then it must be split along the dislocated shoulder joint, and put an instrument to hold the wound; and therefore you must cut into the bone and drain it carefully, and then suture the large lacerations of the wound, if they are great, and treat with splints until healed. And if abscesses come out, cover them with moistened linens soaked in rose oil and put on over the joint; and care for this while you must also keep him lying down wherever the abscess should come out, until it is cured.
de la brisure dou col	of the dislocation of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There has never been a dislocation of the vertebrae in the backbone, and it rarely falls; and also at the spinal column.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to no one and you know whether it will be healed or not, if you see his hands swollen and withered and lifeless and unable to move or extend them, and if you pierce them with a needle, then they do not hurt; realize that such conditions are fatal in many cases, and if the joint is silent and feels well when it is stretched and moved, so you know that the shoulder joint is safe, and that the dislocation should be cured, provided you administer treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Si leu li's esformentre demeing, au jalbais :li les ferme :iurne of theur la terre parisles surtracteur. Neuf lainre desorle tolkinejne juridre toulure loues:nelsanfeelthejourne ofre:
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not affect him, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if the treatment is that you apply cautery to it when there is an abscess under a thorn or in fresh cow's milk, so long as he remains calm; then place him on one of the comfortable restraining supports and bind his wound with a bandage, and command the patient to rest in such a way that he does not sleep on the part where he feels pain, until he is completely recovered.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone fragments dislodge, it must be covered with the cloth; then remove the bone, and if there is a large wound, dress it with a bandage, and treat it by ointment-anointing until healing occurs; and when his "kowe" knee joints are broken, call them "kneecaps", and you must push your bag (medicine) in your left hand toward the right one according to your practice, then place the restraining board and pillow, if it suits you. Then bind him up, and if a bone fragment dislodges, remove it together with the bone and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens infrequently that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does happen, there's usually only a slight diminution at the top; then press down far, and let it descend to the pubic symphysis, and it comes to the patient's painful area near the joint, and swelling occurs where the bone has been fractured.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch your hand over it as long as it is extended due to the fracture; and you determine what type of fracture it is and its shape; and if the fracture is near the top, place such a fracture there with natural form until it heals.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it descends to the abdomen, then let the patient lie on his belly until the restoration of that fracture occurs.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it on the board, then place it under a wooden or metal frame, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and take care of the wound with bandages, until healing occurs.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient sleep on its bone in his sancen "leu. Etrege deus les cheveis en laorein: Laves ceulz deservant: Etude, si esturant sesenees itener: I'sure, eti vair.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	:seies ciates: Audeen dementures ousu coulorex.commeine deurein (a soarjour les che:nose. Latrein ceintures lignat de la, to theiss :pourcesent: a corps:resignes.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder-girdle is what lies between the costal and lumbar parts of the spine, and if it is dislocated, then one must restore it according to one of these two methods: the first being that you take a large piece of moistened earth, following this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And let the shoulders and limbs be raised, and look at the pain in that place; then he cuts down his broken arm on the wood until it bends to the side, and places a wedge of wood under it, so as to extend its length by some weighty object or objects which are used therein. Then put back the dislocation evenly with his hands together, until the dislocation returns in the same way as required.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that it is believed to place the pain on its hilt-piece, and hold the arm by its collar, then instruct some ministers to heat those parts which are at the dislocation of his hands, and others to heat every limb, extending each in its respective part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more advanced, then restrict a limb around the dislocation, and under the dislocation, and extend each minister to their respective part. And if the dislocation is near the chief of the spine, it requires placing one piece moistened in the area between the spine and the dislocation, another towards the costal part, above the dislocation; and likewise, if the dislocation is toward the costal part, then to move gently, as much labor until the dislocation returns in its original position under the spine and along the costal part; then place it evenly, just as required, and bind securely so that there are no movements towards it.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the bandages come off, do not restrain it any further for nine years, and place a moistened linen underneath and above with ointment so long as the bandages are at ease; then unbind and bind in the manner of binding such that you put an elevating board on the dislocation, then gathering up the arm to the sling or to the chest, and place your hand over the spine or breastbone; and fasten the sling, and rebound the arm from the sling, so that the arm is kept steady without anything preventing it, whether a bone moves or not.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone is moving, then use a larger and stronger pillars one by one, and each of those pillars such that it passes over the dislocation; and Ivjourfait, then binds as said. Iiij.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the stones, and tightening, as we have said, when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the puncture wound heals, let it stay joined for seven days as we have said; then observe every three years the knot that does not swell at the joint or the discomfort cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. And if the patient, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such accidents do not occur within two years or more, and the maladies lie on his back, and have hands in his stomach; and place an equal piece of wool under the splint, and observe every hour for a day when the broken limb's figure does not move or become soft, if healing by virtue of medicine occurs and it gives flesh as we have previously mentioned, so that the flesh is first subtly; and whenever starting to recover, it becomes heavy. And it is customary that the splint and leg must be taken apart in 140 days, and therefore you should remove and administer baths and ointments for healing the wound. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, it may last one year or more.
de la brisure du bras	From the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "hammer" (fistula), where one is small and it is that which holds the head; and the other is large, and it is those within it; by chance the hammer breaks only the larger or the smaller, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the smaller hammer (fistula) is fractured, treatment is easy, and healing occurs; but when the larger one is broken, it indicates poor healing, and it is more compressed than when both are broken together. If only the smaller hammer is fractured, then it requires relatively mild extension of movement, and application of equal pressure.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the larger hammer (fistula), then it must be extended more strongly; and elongate at one point, and increase the head of the hand higher than the others, and lower the smaller ones down below, and bind them tightly under themselves, and a woolen cushion over them taller in front of it so that no pain will be suffered by them; then extend the ministers to the arm at the part near the hand or another joint, and other assistants on top. Then place the bandages accordingly to its better shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage there are pieces, put each one to its place, and if there is no danger that holds back the key, then you do not restore it to its place, but make on top of it and consult with the healer, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is an injury in the breakage, I spoke to the individual physician about it; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of the repair the abscesses are relieved by pressing with a rosette made of olive oil and beeswax, not too hard or too soft; then press gently on top, until the abscesses are soothed. Then the physician applies the powder mixture with abundant honey, places it in the wound, making the plate larger than others if necessary; and ensures that the plate has at least two pieces or arms placed in different positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or both; pressing more on top of the fracture rather than elsewhere, and not moving it too much each day, as I said to the individual physician; and ensure the rosettes are neither hard nor soft, and use linen threads that are neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned. Then heal the limb and its tendons after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any accident happens to the member, as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary to bathe the member with warm water until the itching subsides; then let the limb not be too narrowly rested. Then resume the tension, and if the tendons are weakened and the bone moistened, like this matter, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the nasal mucus cannot come to the member because it is too hard; then soften it slightly and leave it for some days, until the nasal mucus comes out, and then tighten again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	: lexinjour deccle laisser. The:se.
de la brisure de la main	Of the dislocation of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	We see that on the back of the hand and we often encounter few fractures, and it only leads to numerous bends.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand's plantar (sole) surface is fractured or bent, it must be examined carefully and held straightly in front of him; then he extends his hand over a laid-out cloth and aligns the broken bones as evenly as possible until they are well joined; and he applies plaster and splints where there is no movement, and then places a support according to the size of the wound; and it is wrapped in one linen sheet.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is on the edge of the sole, it makes a piece of linen strip; and instructs the patient to wrap his broken sole with this linen strip; then he wraps a long linen strip around it, and also secures the support bandage with an adequate thickness similar to that used for the sole' mantle, and fastens it in such a manner as it requires.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the dorsal (top) part of the hand, it must place a support bandage on it; and another one inside the plantar surface, so that the hands are elevated and straight, then binds all around the two sides of the hand firmly.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not belong to any of these categories, it is a dislocation, and he must place it in an even position; and straps with the plantar surface, and when you see there is no movement, then places a straight small board to elevate the dislocation and prevent it from moving; and if the fracture belongs to any of the other fingers (other than index or middle), he must place it in an even position, and tie the bandage with the corresponding finger that follows. Either binds all together, which is strong enough, or places a support board as for a dislocation; then preserves in restoration and treatment until such time as they come out again, according to what I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	And if the fracture is on the wrist (cuisse in Old French), it must be placed in an even position; then straps are used with the plantar surface of the hand, and when there is no movement observed, a straight small board is utilized to elevate the dislocation and prevent its mobility. If the fracture is found on any other finger besides the index or middle, it should be properly aligned; in such cases, bandaging is applied with the adjacent finger as support. The hand can be securely bound, ensuring strength, or a board similar to one used for dislocation. Conservation and treatment continue until movement occurs again, consistent with earlier observations.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The shoulder's bone is often fractured, and it can be seen clearly when she turns both forward and backward; and the healing consists of two parts: one above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And then there is great pain in his face, and he extends each of his limbs equally to its corresponding part; and it's when the fracture has penetrated into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If the fracture is close to the root of the shoulder blade, then one set of limbs towards the point of impact, and another set internally near the fracture; and if it's also nearby the genitals, there should be a corresponding extension downward from the penis. Then attach the brace evenly on both sides of his shoulders, as long as he is in accordance with his natural figure, and then apply pressure to stabilize, ensuring that such movement does not return.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an accompanying swelling, let it be soothed first then return to your work and treatment; the binding is made in two parts.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is required that you wrap around the fracture in a thick double band made of either two or three strips; above the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel touches the root of the navel, and stretch a long strip between the shoulder blade and the leg near the groin, beneath the genitals there; then bend the strip upwards, over the bandage placed on the fracture. Then you place stones or sticks under the foot' mantle-covered area of the thigh bone; apply eight layers of fabric covering the joint between leg and shoulder; proceed with binding in two or three placements above the fracture; as it approaches further from the fracture, lessen the tension. Then move the strips wrapped around both legs that you have placed between the thigh and shoulder to below the chief strip there; continue until away from the point of injury, and if the pressure does not move from its position, then leave it as such, then check to see whether any swelling or other symptoms reappear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, let him dislocate and address what comes to him as we have often said; and if he has pieces of bone that are grasped, he must know whether he can pull them out or not; and if he cannot, then he must cut into the joint, and extract it, and treat it as we have often said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never has the kneecap been broken in this way as it is when setting a shoulder splint or arm brace; all other ways of restoration made no difference to the patient's severe pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	You know that the kneecap has been restored in one year, or less than a year, or more than a year, depending on the various individual differences.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	It is known that in the knee joint there are few breaks, but it bends many times; and if it does break, then it's either a fracture or an open wound, and happens at any injury, and one feels pain well when injured.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that it puts back whatever is loose at its proper place, as long as it can be put together again; then set up an implant or peg, and if you have experience with it, apply it as it must be done, and prepare all other fracture arrangements we mentioned in our treatises for such cases where a cast fits perfectly. Then for each accident what he needs to do until he is healthy again.
de la brisure de la jambe	from a break in the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	It is known that in the leg there are two bones, one called 'mastodon' not by chance and the other 'musket'; and all other fractures as they occur in the arm are treated similarly to a shoulder injury, and therefore the restoration is done in much the same way for these injuries, and the operations are also quite similar.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken in pieces, turn the leg on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken in pieces, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken in pieces, he feels great pain and can see it well; then turn around him. But first extend his leg; place the stretrances evenly, and bind them all together; however, as long as the fracture is ugly and there are many small pieces of the break, and the extension is smaller and lighter than usual, and align it according to its nature.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	:
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of bone so frail
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come from a fracture, but the fragile bones seldom experience such breakage and only with minimal movements do they suffer harm.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the delicate bones experience such fractures and you see them bulging against each other; they lie so malformed on the ground like if they were trying to fly, then lift your foot onto their side, now let the bone rise up, pressing it until it returns in its joints; place a hammer and nails above, and put small screws underneayer of the leg, restrain the limb according to need, and wrap it with layers of cloth, along with other things you are familiar with.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And if three or four years pass by, dislocate the ligament because you will find the bones either equal in size, whether fractured or displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are no bone fragments to repair, restore them as we previously discussed for the hands; then set up a splint according to the length of each fragment and make it slightly wider than needed, place that small cloth on the patient'inasplintiton; and if there are two or three fragments broken, position a corresponding splint based on its size underneath the cloth covering the area, wrap it in one sheet of linen, restrain the limb accordingly; and keep the head slightly elevated above the bottom part of the splint, ensuring good ventilation for the patient's foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is imperative that you do not forget the other treatments we have mentioned for similar injuries; and in every case, act accordingly to what has been prescribed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the foot bone.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the foot bone of a woman is fractured, make it as large as possible and then incline it to her back part, securing it with a belt; fill the wound cavity, and so forth: if after three or four years. And when you see the breakage appears restored, and put a bladder of sheep will beast in that place, and make envelloigne comens les bois fracture desuor.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the shoulder blade is broken for man or woman, and it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these subsequent fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For the break signifies in several ways the right path of restoration: that is why.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vein, when it is broken, take a bird's throat and bind the vein; then wrap it in cloth, and let it rest for two or three years until it heals quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of a break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is required for those who have a break with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder blade or the shoulder joint, that they be cured immediately, as our examples show.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, then re-injection of vitriol, if you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the break in that same hour or day, when the abscess does not appear again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess appears again, then leave the restoration for another new day until it is calmed down, and do not interfinate for a year or quarter thereafter, because you will bring in bad luck.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and exposed through an opening, it requires that you apply it gently with your hands, extending only slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not assist you in applying it evenly with your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, which is 1.5 to 2.5 times long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and because it's a matter of expertise that he impregnate .3 or .4 depending on what each case requires in each treatment of fracture; and whether it's round and thick enough so that it does not collapse at all under pressure with your work.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palanquin", so that the shoulder joints are placed on top of the bone exposed; and put it once, so that they are equal to one another. And if the fracture is subtle, and the strain cannot well grasp the bone, so covien that you place the top part of the bone, as long as he has power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	surex:arece devises (10ire. Ilusage. ousre le:secre. Andresent, anderiora morce issole ofere.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, you know that it is not in its natural place anymore. Do this as long as it remains out of place; take one drop of black vinegar into a little cloth dampened with vinegar, and apply it carefully so that it does not touch any oil or other thing on the wound; then gently cover the wound again, covering all of it according to the size of the wound, and give good care that the wound is not stretched with a fracture; and many times have done this deeds the wise physician, and by doing so brought forth death or corrosion on the patient at any time; and should be more molten and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that something unfortunate may happen to it, just like we said before, and relieve pain at the site, there should be no need to place anything on top of those; but encase entirely around them, in the damp cloths, heavy fabrics, and lint. And when after one or two years the wound is reopened by a blow to it, then you know that what you placed inside has been preserved, and apply healing ointment to the wound, similar to other poultices and remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is required that you lay the limb down for two times a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes sound and healthy again.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is required that the limbs are discharged in such a manner as to allow the blood flow unobstructedly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for many days it does not heal but breaks again, and the patient cannot mend it anymore because there are small fragments of bone; then you know that with this wound one must treat it carefully, and remove all these dislodged pieces that cause pain to come about.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess appears on the surface or in any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what is discussed in this chapter by the physician. And when the bone breaks and protrudes from the limb, like that of the shoulder blade or joint aid, and similar things with large limbs; do not treat it at all because many times the death has come about after waiting for two decades or more; perhaps you caught it after waiting for a couple of years or three hundred years, then cure the wound if you can; but if not, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	and those who come with saltwater (i.e., infections caused by the presence of high amounts of salt).
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We have come many times after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is close to the joint, and it's quite unfortunate to see how the limb looks afterwards; and sometimes not even the limbs can perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The '''Aragonaises ofs lez.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	nisses toastreins issoignes:sondes accestiferevener. oukermeanturedeurendecanysewaxancheverse,paroi that  <bricholding :lenteles: Increguexileux,ise,
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and returns afterwards in weak and delicate limbs, for many reasons: because it was too tightly bound, as if it did not fit at all; or because it had too many ligaments, so that it could not bear the load on its joints; or due to excessive arousal; or due to numerous dislocations; or due to large movements, which were not in their time; or because there was little flesh in the body, they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you feed the patient, and make their body limber, until it multiplies in them; and give them baths, and bring joy and pleasure to them; then apply pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and often arises with running water, until the swelling returns to its natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A twisted member after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone breaks apart, and the shape of the twisted member is ugly, neither does this naturally belong to its work: no one should believe those fools who say you must break the joint all new; many people have done so in our land, and these methods are blamed for causing great harm, sometimes even death. However, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then make a mollifying ointment, like diatomaceous earth well made; take musk of marsh pearlwort, confit it with lion's grease or linseed oil, and apply the ointment on top; or take figs that have fat, grind them with flour from colon seeds, and other medicines that soften the hardening.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is no bone with nodulation to rub continuously and for a long time on wet hands; rather, ease the movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twistedness is old and hardened, like stone, it needs to be burned with iron, so as to cover the bone, delicately at a fine incision; and apply salve and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation comes from no joint of its place, so it cannot move at all; and the limb is misformed, and the patient suffers great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs for any reason, it must now be kept to regain tenderninas.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because if it is delayed, the joint swells up, and sometimes put back to its place with pins in the bone; but it does not need to move at all where it has become inflamed: many times caused rashes and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happened, make the patient healthy again, then let it rest until the discomfort is relieved; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then massage lightly on each member as treatment comes to his point.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the treatises of the dislocations of the limbs' heads.
des mandibules	Of the mouths, et estuet quint deusie. Labeaux parole esparagus, laissades pour leescles en cesteins siens, que jectes apeirre chascune.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	: ilfaire levet ous anda voi tupper, aids aforse:sangustromaine.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns again by various arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset promptly, without complaint.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a manner that the minister's finger turns the head of the patient with malady, and thrusts one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is .ij. parts; and commands the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician places equal weight upon it, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the returning is stiffened, immediately bringing together the .ij parts of the mandibles, heating them with warm water and oil until they become loose again; without complaint for a return that has been stiff or slow, as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned correctly, and the mouth of the patient with malady closes well after being made soft by covering it with a cloth dampened in oil roses and wax, then apply moisture lightly to all the joints.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient with malady lies on his back, and if his limbs are between .ij. spaces (possibly referring to specific measurement of space or distance), ensuring he does not move them either right or left, but merely eases light meat until the pains are gone and the mandibles have been anointed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then pour the patient, he must eat lightly and not work to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well anointed and sound again.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the .ij mandibles cannot be restored to their former position within an hour, and are not converted back into their original locations, then fevers arise that are customary for such conditions, and possibly even a digestive solution or nausea with vomiting may occur;
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a loss; and many times those affected have died within seventy years.
de la forcelle	and of forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The little piece cannot dislocate back and forth between the sides and shoulders, and is never displaced further, and it really feels that way to him.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the severe pain goes away on his back, and he extends his arms; then presses the joint with your hand, and it returns; then places him on the elevator and supports the knee, and holds it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the limb that is towards his side cannot dislocate; if not, and when it displaces at all, then reposition him with his joint, as we have said; put him on the elevator and support the knee, hold it, and command the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in this way we bring back the shoulder joints, when they are displaced from their position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Knows that the shoulder is dislocated for only two reasons: firstly, it displaces its upper part towards the arm; and secondly, its lower part; and sometimes it displaces the top part above, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it is never dislocated behind the shoulder, and not within the nerves; and often displaces downwards towards the arm, especially for those who have little strength, because in this case she falls quickly; for those with enough strength, it jumps up and returns to its original position.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes by some impact or fracturing, the shoulder swells up sharply at an incision, and it is believed that she has been dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It therefore must be that you examine it thoroughly, as long as you are certain about it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that when the dislocation goes towards the arm, and distinguishes between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, you will find in their manifest differences.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hole, and around its upper part there is also a hole, as if it were one bone; and it cannot make the severe pain return to its original position or any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is displaced upwards, it is not hidden, because you will see it clearly around the shoulder joint.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this way of dislocation is not to be reduced when it is new or if the child's body is painful.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the dislocation.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	s: thefeucces:nacue ishacivekastre presse. tstarte (butt:secrebesculat itudeximente.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then simply dislocate the severe pain on his back, and place a piece of even linen underneath it, not too moist nor too hard, then put the patient's heel on top of that, and carefully elevate the head of the misaligned shoulder, and remove the limb from the shoulder joint.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And other ministers may treat the head of the misaligned shoulder so that it does not move further; if the dislocated shoulder returns as before, and you see if repositioning according to this method works:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And make a larger body present than the misaligned one; and place it against the shoulder blade undernee the misaligned shoulder, elevate the shoulder blade, so that the misaligned shoulder hangs downwards.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other ministers may remove the limb from the misaligned shoulder towards the abdomen; and if the dislocation is too loose, do not put any weight on it, and the dislocation returns to its original position now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the repositioning can also be done in another way: and it is like fixing a long stick on the ground, which should have the same properties as an arrow, not too heavy nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then place something soft under the misaligned shoulder, and if the dislocation is long-standing, extend the patient's hand away from the other side in a straight manner, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return through these methods that we have mentioned, perform this treatment: take a long stick of two arms in length, with the head shaped to enter underneath the shoulder blade. In the manner shown below: (image is supposed to depict the described shape)
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place the stick under the long-standing part of the shoulder, which should not bruise the misaligned shoulder; and put it under the misaligned shoulder blade; extend your arm along the lengthy stick, and attach the sling there; hold the sling on one side of a wide strap, and extend your hand downwards, and let the patient' Written in this passage is an example of:
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	This passage describes the process of attaching an arm sling in various steps. To answer this question, we must identify which literary device is not used in these descriptions:
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	sour. Ipsum ajorne desu it's esle malice ofte ofrerexample. It’s oues devisiij. In theavior.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the dislocation is due to dampness and it has come about, or for another reason, then you must administer four pins, as they are set before the physician who specializes in pincers.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after two years it slips again, and the dislocation does not hold, and it cannot lift its arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve at the top of the shoulder is crushed or stretched or softened; and you know that the dislocation has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the front or the chest, and involving the muscles or behind, if it is made by a blow or arm extension, and administer other treatments; and care for as long as he remains healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the treatment comes greater pain in the limb and returns to slight movements, if it uses the malady's hot bath many times until that pain subsides, and returns to its first natural state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the cost of the dislocation is reimbursed by pins and returns; and if it's dislodged from all parts, especially in front and behind, and you see and feel well; and refund according to each case.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocation cost with good health, you must see it openly. Because the dislocation is fixed, and it cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset him again so as to remove loose bones, because if one removes loose bones, then it would be troublesome to bring them back; and possibly they cannot be removed entirely in any case, especially when they are at the rear; for such dislocations cause greater pain than others, and often lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration, if you can bring his hand outstretched: and your handgive frome in it's root of the jointure of tway.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand back to its own hand, and with pain from the root of the palm that has been released.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if he does not return to the normal position, apply strong extension; and when two ministers extend his arm, they stretch it back so that it does not move with extension; then turn the arm in each direction, then wrap a long and wide cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the doctor touches the joint at his hand, he does not use any oil to soften the joint, then binds it tightly until it relaxes.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is back in place, he places it on a dry board with pieces of iron undernee, strains it firmly, and holds the maladjusted arm at the elbow for several days, then releases it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, resume the board with the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is securely fastened; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels sore after the return of the joint, and it moves again, bathe and rub well, until it is soothed; or you place a warm wool milk on the joint for one day and one night, then let the doctor apply hot baths.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, constantly rub the joint, then replace the warm wool milk, and then apply hot baths; and do this for one or two times until it is healed; and if you see, put on warm moist cloth with fat, and stretch it upwards; and if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand, and when it returns it is light compared to other joints; thus you must bring it back quickly in my presence as soon as it has been dislocated, so that its limb becomes swollen or if it is located elsewhere with heat.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return is that you place the maladjusted hand on a table, extend the ministers' hands, and observe it evenly, so that he places his palm in front of the dislocation, and binds it tightly until it relaxes.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Generally speaking, you must see if he is well positioned; then place the maladjusted hand's back on a table with extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the maladjusted hand's back on a table and he observes his hand in front of the joint appearance; if it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the extension with mild board relaxes, then let it return in this way by repeating.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you do not put the dislocation back in position after some days, then let the joint remain tight.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	other thing;et s'il ne por ce qu’ il est enmurte la mains.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	:er vout, thees iten le.mesure le. I'sies and in:eterng les iaustraistre. Anderior, le soull ofsusain:lorenture.  ires. Auble lorintres acept. Whatent.I :ger ione.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no crack, then the hot water treatment, and scraping until he becomes healthy again.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	The dislocation of a finger joint.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	They have never dislocated the joint of his hand to any part, not once on the back of the palm or the abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	And it is the joint, and reset the dislocation into its pockets as long as he relaxes, then support the head of the dislocated joint, and move it towards the area where it has come undone.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let him stay for two years, and then put him back in place; and nourish him as we have said, and make him stretch each day, and make him move again, and reconnect him, doing this often until he becomes slender.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And also do the same if it is dislocated in another area of the hand, doing so as you have done before until he becomes healthy again.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Double dislocation of the shoulder blade.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When either the shoulder blade or the neck is dislocated in more than one place, there is no remedy for it, because death comes to him quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that his movements are uncoordinated freely given, and he cannot hold them, and many times the limbs become weakened, or the fingers or elbows or legs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times it moves in two parts; that which moves at the back is called "Gilbert's disease."
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment, in this case, is that Gilbert's disease came from childhood; if it had no cure or treatment at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which falls due to a fall or due to similar things, the old methods of treatments were told by great words, but there is no significant benefit in all this.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have acted according to my intention and formed different remedies.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in Gilbert's disease which comes from the uterus, there is no treatment or healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes directly to the side joints, and it cannot be healed except with remedies specifically for those coming from the backside, as I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the painful area should be spread over one of its limbs equal to him, and have strain from above so that it does not break apart.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a piece of firewood on the head in the ground forming it, and another one for the fingers, and tie together loose joints around the painful areas, and other ones for the hamstrings, thigh muscles, groins, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two people can see if the joints are connected, one to the head and the other for the fingers, among the various pieces of firewood.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And they should be firmly fastened as we have said, and the patient places his hands on the spine straighten until he relaxes. This passage likely pertains to a part of the treatment where patients are asked to lie on their back with their palms pressed against the spine in order for it to relax or straighten:
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a yoke of two arms long, and pierce through it in the middle, and let the pain be on that side, and strike the head of the yoke into the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And put his pins on the other head of the yoke, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see him doing it with his hand turning.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And do you insert two pins into the pain of one arm, and place another two pins between each pin, with an inch or so space between them.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each pin there should be one hole, or the turning device moves over it, and firmly fix them in place so they do not move; and between each pair of pins there should be a small pin that turns, so that when those turn, the turning device can rotate.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the line that is among the scales to the turning device near the head of the yoke, and another line towards the pins at the other turning device, and each minister turns his turning device on all sides of the line as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is like that, spread a drying agent abundantly with some wax, and then the sticks, and then the candle on a table of two feet long, which will clean the area of gilbert's fracture and the healthy part of the spine, and bind it with a line as we have said, and use the shoulder pain lightly so that it is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if nothing happens at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the candle we mentioned before; and sometimes I give a small piece of cloth.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And there is sometimes an appearance in the back spine of the upper vertebrae, and we must take care that it is dislocation; and because the bone comes out for this reason, one should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hernia.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	We know that the dislocations of the hernia and those of the shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone; they do not occur like other joints; the joint of the hernia is divided into four parts: between them, before and behind; in this case it's more apart, but less forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation when joining the painful leg with the healthy one is that it becomes longer and the painful joints are wider than the healthy ones, and the patient cannot double his knee cap by heat.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the muscle that is in front of the hip joint because the kneecap comes out from there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign that he gets to backward, so it is contrary to those in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs that occur in front, so it is: healing well; wholesometh they do not double the knee capillary, and if it be, and if ne'teles deffinant lains defforest leu enlengulieres desormenent malaidexemens deffice quittance a lauremest itaigne:
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	kewage, ilk acomprehair: the costume so:10xer:carlifles: anter ofxent (the litter.  ça. ous, siure:cause.tin.a.   :ce lictis.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this kind of dislocation so that you respond to its presence, and it lasts according to its position, and there is no remedy; and it does not require any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the shoulder where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, if you hasten to reset the joint, and place it back inside and downward, and move it towards right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it requires that you prepare one strong instrument, and apply the leg to two hands or to a ligature placed above the groin;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And other ministers extend their hands above in a way that they push their hands down on the sill, then they bind it with another ligature under the thigh; and others have the head of the same ligature.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend upwards and downwards both of them once, until the malady is lifted from the ground at least once, and then continue hanging there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in these four types of dislocations, and if the dislocation has returned, just as we have said, it's well done.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If this is not the case, it requires a cure for its appearance. When the dislocation is close to being reset, it requires that you soothe the affected area on the side of the shin, then apply the ligature under the root of the knee, and around the hollow where the artery lies, then place the ligature high towards the angle, and toward the muscle.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then another ministers spread their arms and hug the large vein of the injured shin, and extend it to its lower form: if it returns now to its joint; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in this manner that we have described, then it requires that you bind the two malaligned feet together with a strong ligature under each foot arch and at the heels, and extend the malaligned leg twice as much as the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And then be hang them from the head of a strong beam, and .iiij. etes de sourcilier d’un l’encoi.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	:en leu'soule lore togeau ous :" (afeildesanlenture ofte soultient.age es:governement fromage. Itumorrect.journead. Itrag, etiquninage.  ́se: itent'soutre jurmente.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then apply two sticks, one to the head and another to the shoulders, then insert a stick between the ribs into the patient's chest to restore its shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and planted with wet linens around it so that the wound does not bleed, then stretch each limb towards him, and he sets the dislocation in place with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. But if not, place him on the ground and press as we have said in relation to swelling, and elevate his sore side with care for the patient's pain.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, it must be quickly extend the affected leg, and according to what I have said; then place his hand where he feels pain from being in an angry position, press with the other hand, and pull the limb away towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is farther back, it does not need to extend the affected leg downward or lift him up from the ground, but he must be as we have said in the position of lying after being pulled out further back, like when we laid on the two hinges.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and lean it upon his face, and he extends it as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and when the patient extends his legs, they will be equal; but adjust the ribs, and put the support, and bind a band around it so that he does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and if he rests for two or three years or more, then put the support again, and if they are equal, straighten as before, and let him go, for three years; then release him to walk well until his limbs are strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The legs are dislocated according to three methods: that is, between and behind, and backward; and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if it does not touch his hip, then you know he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up right, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and place him on his feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your hands, and bring it between your legs, then bend the two sides of the knee joint formed; and another assistant extends his limb so that the legs return to their normal position, and you know he walks well with his leg bent at the hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the poultice on it, and draw the leg to the hip, and tie them together strongly for two or three years or more, then release him; and do not force the patient to walk until his limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the members are not present, then give it a strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip joint, so that he is healthy again.
de la dislocation dou talon	about the dislocation of the ankle joint.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The toes are sometimes united, and sometimes fully dislocated, between and backward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs that heel isle de la hainche:il demeure duce:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	levesures. Legi- n'sousre voudur,lais. Theesure from theur: entirelegrau deafarent, thewomane.  ige of itilight.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the top, it must be set right, and you hold him with one ministration above the ankle on the leg.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then grasp the patient with your right hand, and then repeat the same with the left hand two times, then raise him up, and let the patient down gently from above.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this two times as we have said, lifting and lowering the patient; if it returns, that is good; but if not, then the procedure must be repeated because it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return like this, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and firmly place a stretcher under his hips between his knees, and wrap him with cloths so that he does not hurt himself.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then you should tie the other hand and have other ministers stretch out the patient's arms or along his neck where it lies on top of him.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister should stretch equally, and the stretran should be placed again between the hips of the patient to hold him while you lift.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the dislocation equally at his hands, and other ministers tie the healthy leg above the knee, and the dislocation will return promptly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the right point, then you apply the plaster and fasten it above the leg, form the straitening, and hold the patient's leg, warning those behind the ankle not to pull too tightly.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three years if the straitening is not loosening, and then remove it after one year or quarter, and send the patient to walk around in four years.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he moves before this term, it is not certain that he will no longer dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a blow strikes and the patient comes, you must calm him down as we have said elsewhere, until he is well again.
des dois	This last line appears to be out of context, but it could potentially mean "from both sides," referring perhaps to addressing concerns from both medical practitioners or patients about a particular treatment method. Without further text for reference, however, this interpretation remains speculative. The rest of the translation remains as provided above.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When these two dislocations are repositioned, they should be gently extended in work and it's a light thing. This sentence seems to follow the medical context of discussing the process for treating certain types of joint or musculoskeletal injuries involving repeated relocation (re-dislocation) rather than two dislocations as described earlier.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if these dislocations are in no other part of the back of the patient, you must set him up on one or two straight boards or completely upright table, and put your patient so that it exposes those joints, then press firmly until he returns. This sentence likely refers to a method for correcting dislocations where the common location is not in the back of the body, possibly addressing cervical (neck) dislocation scenarios within historical medical practices.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is equalized, and nothing opens up in the foot of the patient, then place a table underneath with two supports, straiten him firmly, and let him stay for two years, then remove him; and make him rest until he's well again. This sentence seems to describe part of the after-care treatment where repositioning has been accomplished and measures are taken to ensure proper healing over a period of time with gradual reintroduction to activity.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations in combination
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	Ander les maundes a ce encele dislocation
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	:etude.tard, aragon. In theapre. The English translation.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And use at the beginning of soothing treatments, and let the patient hold God in their hand, if there is no hope for healing.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, now straighten the limb back to its original position, so that the incision swells again.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is out of place, now apply soothing treatments and care for the wound, as it requires dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with dislocation there is also a fracture and small bones displaced, and the bone fragments, do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And do not enter the path of fear, as I have said, because it is in accordance with your Creator's will, and for His knowledge of your weapon and body (the Church). Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The medieval medical treatise discusses various aspects of treatment and diagnosis. It includes advice on fire cautery to promote healing by allowing hair growth unimpeded by pricks, as well as the importance of gentle incision techniques in treating wounds, abscesses, arrow extractions, and dislocations. The text stresses careful handling during repositioning, especially when dealing with dislocated joints, emphasizing initial resetting and subsequent soothing measures for healing. It also highlights a spiritual dimension by advising against fearful actions that go against divine will and underscinas the importance of understanding one's own body (implying knowledge within religious context).
