Here is the translation: And it has come to me in vision that I will complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is strange to everything altogether, so the knowledge is perished and broken off, and nothing remains of it except for a few descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is alienated the knowledge.
It seems to me that I will bring it to life together with the ordering of this treatise according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. and I will bring together the forms of fire cauteries and other instruments of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for it, as is necessary.
And for that reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for him who intervenes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms, and conjunctions, and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of vertebrae, and the arrangement and moving and resting muscles, and the origin of their issue.
And so Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little. and indeed in the art of handcraft.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he make an error and kill people.
in such a way that I have seen many of those who interfere with this science and so abandon their knowledge and sense experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut out the abscess of scrofula or collarbone from a woman and cut the arteries of the collarbone. Why so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead between her hands.
And a certain wise man who treated an arrow wound on an old man's leg, and the arrow was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died inside three days.
And I had already been summoned to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it was not removed he would die.
And a certain wise man who took care of the duke of our land who had his leg broken and with the breaking was wounded;
and the wise men, full of ignorance, set the breaking on top of the wound in such a way that it was firmly fixed, and left no room for healing, and left him thus at the end.
and he commanded that he not be loosened at all;
and remained thus so that the leg became entirely gangrened and the toes came to ruin.
I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come and untie the leg. and when I untied it so it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all the way the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who burst an abscess that had become gangrenous, and then inflamed it by the wickedness of his authority.
For a gangrenous sore, when it is purged of melancholic humor, does not agree that one touches it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one which has peril in several situations;
and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which it is necessary that you keep them for yourself, so that the foolish mouth cannot speak ill of you.
Take your arms in order, and begin to treat your patients lightly and firmly, and follow the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised.
and let go of the grievous illnesses of bad health;
and put away your doubts about what troubles you, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: Don't take on yourself a bad disease unless you're called a foolish doctor.
I have written this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and medical cauterizations with water, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet.
and about the forms of instruments, and of fixings for cauterizations, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things;
and it is the chapters that are ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is the chapters ordered as far as the head, and the shapes of the instruments.
Furthermore, so that we may remember the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and detriment of each complexion.
I say that the quality of help, and of harm, is the longest word and subtlest science and secret responses;
and about these things many wise men spoke and agreed with them;
and I am not satisfied with their words, because I fear the length.
I say that fire-cautery helps universally to all constitutions where there is matter, except for two constitutions: it's to know warm complexion with regard to material, and dry complexion with regard to material.
In a warm and dry complexion together with material, some people divided and said that the fire cautery is a great help; and others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured for a hot disease by heat or dryness;
and those who said the opposite say that the fire cautery makes great help for hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men. For when you consider the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be so on some occasions through experience.
And in any case, do not intervene except by one who has experimented with it, and who knows by long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the remedies and the space of time;
We have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is among the secrets of cures, and of greater good than burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth to another member unless it touches the one that is cauterized, and does no harm to any other member if it is not called upon.
Burning medicines come from member to member by applying, and bring grievous disease to the afflicted member; and it happens that the patient dies.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excessiveness.
And I have found this by experiment and the length of my service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and therefore I excuse the length of my speech, for it does not please me that I take away from you the secret which is revealed by fire and the quality of work, how it repels the diseases of bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating; Receive him in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm that befalls is put right by the aid of the cautery. and likewise, if the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a later time when greater harm may come to the member.
And never think thus, dear son, as foolish men do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return. and they say so;
and they say so; but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is not just a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and excels in value for its hastiness and virtue of its work and power.
And a possible thing is that the patient's illness comes at times according to their complexion, the place of the illness, and its virtue;
and there are accumulated in him the excesses through the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauterization is administered to the area where he has an abundance of excesses and moisture, as with hot cautery for pain, and similar things, and that same pain does not return. but it happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is worth after medicine, but their intention is false, and it is said that cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer treatments in any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is good.
Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancient ones said that cauteries of golden instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and for its high substance.
and they said that the marks of a cautery do not produce disease, but this is not true for I have tested it and found that it is true in some men.
and gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, as they said. And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it becomes cool at once.
and if one heats it too much; so they are burned to the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And I have arranged this chapter from the beginning up to here, so that the way may be easier to find.
This cauterization is worth for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pains of teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, clarifying the third humour or the fourth, according to what virtues, age, and custom of the patient it can support. and then make the patient lie back.
And then make him sit crossed in your hands, and put his hands on your knees;
and after that place the tip of your thumb on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let come to you your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from then afterwards sharpen the cautery which is called "olivary", of which there is the form: And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make a downward and outward motion of your hand little by little in turning; Then lift up your hand slightly, and withdraw the instrument if you see the bone a little bit; and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you;
After take a little of silk, and put in soft and wet cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and let it be for three days;
After placing a damp cloth on moist skin; and leave it so until the scab is removed. After healing the wound of anointing, which is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it remains sound.
And the old men say that when a wound stays open longer, it purges more; and therefore one should help it.
And some of them said that one should heat the cauterization until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
And the others say that one should make a fire cauterization as long as possible, and push it so hard that it reaches as far as the bone is wide, just like the women put in their flax combs so that the humors may flow out.
and one should leave the wound open for a long time; After that, one should heal and bind.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good in every way, except for some men who have a way of fear.
and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
for the head is weakened by continuous natural fluxions, as we observe in other members;
and even when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of a fire cauterization is more safe and gentle for me, and from this I work in such a way that I bring about salvation.
When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, then the patient should use year's resins and pills which are called "cochie", and for purging of the head, and with oils and emplasters. and if one makes the cauterization that we have previously said, and it is not effective. Take care lest the patient's head be of strong constitution, and let it not be too cold; Then one must cauterize below this type of cautery a little as we have said above. Afterwards make a cautery on each horn of the head right up to the bone, just as we have said before, and make another one in the place which is called "vasselz"; and it is the place where one puts poultices; and lift your hand so that you do not see right up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
of the head's cauterization When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease extends as far as the eye, and the joint is purged by medicines of the world, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and nothing helps; Then he performs cauterizations by two methods, namely from medicine and fire.
The cauterization of medicine is that you take an almond, strip its skin and grind it into small pieces like two halves, and then make a temple on the spot where the pain holds in such a way that you can place the ground almond under the skin.
and when it is placed, if it binds and strengthens well, and leaves it thus for twelve hours; and then unbind and treat the wound with garlic, and leave the sore thus for two or three days; then put a poultice of buttered cotton on it until it purges itself.
After the treatment with ointment, as long as it remains sound;
and if you see that this is not good, then make use of some burning medicines that I have written or any other treatment of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery to which it pertains.
And it is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a clove or if there is a little curvature, and has a small appearance.
and sets it on the painful place, and holds one's hand and turns the iron a little bit, until the middle of the spear that is to be burned.
and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flow forth abundance of blood.
Then apply a poultice on top of it, and put it on the place for three days; then apply moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", do it all along the point, and take care not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of a headache
When you treat a migraine as we have previously discussed in divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the preceding cauterization about medicine and fire does not help, then you must heat the cauterizer which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
and then place it on the aching spot a line of about half an inch long, and lift your hand once, and make sure you do not cut the artery and that it does not reach just to the bone;
and beware of the jawbone that goes limp when eating, and the nerves have regard only to the limpness and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or even greater fear for one who does not know how to deal with it, and is not experienced or studied; and leave the work to follow its way;
but I will tell you how one stays bloodless when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the head also as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed.
and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterizer having two knives; and this cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear due to coldness, and one has tried medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizing tool called "poins" to the form:
Afterward, prick all around the ailing ear, or around both if the pain holds in both, and draw away slightly above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to begin; and have X points around each ear;
after the cure, let it be until it is healed.
of the torment of the mouth
The torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease;
and do not make a cauterization on similar things that come from scorbut and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this similar thing of torture that moves with phlegm from urine and purgations of head and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and put the cauterization in the part that appears healthy, and make it cauterize near the top of the ear on the edge of the head, and another one in the temple as long as a finger; and let the cautery go on until the middle of the key is burned away.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is like the appearance of a cutlery that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knives be a little bigger;
after the cure, let the wound be as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one at the place called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
and be cured as we have said before.
From lethargy
Give to the patient great years and pillowy substances for the brain.
After that, apply to the head of the patient all, and place on the occuput a mustard plaster as written in the treatise on plasters.
and this is the manner of the fire-cautery: as I have said.
If it heals thus, it is good; and if it does not heal, then make three fire-cauterizations inside the head from above down to the neck, and have a space of two days between each cauterization.
and treat it as the others, and if you see it swelling, and the patient is suffering, then make one cauterization in the middle. and if necessary, make two more on top of the two horns, and treat it until it is healed.
And let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be, as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleared of years and what we have said beforehand;
after that, the head of the patient is to be cauterized inside and on each horn, and then again behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most bitter part is burned, and lift up your hand; after the patient has been cured, and let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be, as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a cautery except in the case of those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from prolonged treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot otherwise suffer, then do gargarism and mastication to cleanse the brain often with good meats;
After the king's leader is one hundred leagues away, and I make the cautery as we have said before, and I make the cautery on the vassal, and on each horn. and if the patient is far and suffering, I make the cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, do one subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thick phlegm accumulates, then do those cauterizations of threads as we said for someone with paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is before in the division.
After the king's leader of the patient; after I make a linen wrapping well done, like a circle, and put it on the head;
and let the patient be crossed, and be well held from all sides;
after present the lining, and make moves with old sheep's tallow butter; and let the heat be tempered by fire, so that the back can bear it when poured on. After clearing the circle from inside towards the head, and letting it cool down;
and do this to the patient once a week with another good governance, until he is healed.
Or, if you wish to cauterize, make many points all over the iron.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain equally;
and then put on a wet cotton cloth in butter and goose fat.
of the disease of the eyes When the disease comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and guard against all moistures, and make him sweat or take a bath several times on an empty stomach.
After this, command him to put his head back and make a cauterization on the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples if the descending flow of the humor is together in both eyes, or in one if the descending flow is in one.
and cut off all the veins and arteries that are below the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of bleeding of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the flow with all your might.
And I will teach you how to extract arteries and perform cautious incisions.
and sometimes one makes a cauterization or cautery under the two bones that are behind.
and one sees that it is cold and humid excess, then make the cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of this procedure going down to the eyes. I apply a cauterization on the forehead, and two cauterizations above the two temples, and two cauterizations or cauteries under the two bones. and if it is necessary to do more, then apply a small cauterization on top of each little cauterization.
When you administer the medicine according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three bitter hellebores to drink. after the king's beard, and make a fire cauterization on the spot of the olive-cautery. and make two cauterizations on the "clavilis" which is called above the two earlocks, a little below the hair.
and beware of the artery so you don't cover it.
And that is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this iron called "olivary". To which it pertains:
And if you see, make two cauterizations on the two earlocks as long as the earlocks are.
and don't remove your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points to the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyebrow is converted to a beard, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to know by fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are equal and have grown, then put the patient in a good state; afterward mark on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign below the hairs;
then put damp cotton in egg white and powdered periwinkle on the eye, then heat the cauterize as is its form:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked point by point several times, so that the edges be burned away.
and the sign of the health of the operation is that you see the paper contracted, and the hairs lifted to the level of the eye.
Lift your hand then, and let it be so for three days, then put a moistened cotton cloth in the poultice until the scab is removed. after the treatment of ointment as long as they are healed.
And if after this the hairs come and the paper is softened then start the cauterizing again on that very spot just as you did first.
and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place and is even, and does not prick the hair at all.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
then take French soap and live chalk, each one a third, and grind them together well. et the way haste, so that it does not cool, then put on top of the form as you are made like the leaf of the myrtle tree, and place on top of paper eyes; and if the illness remains only in one oil alone, then it must be worked on that one, and also in both; and place a moistened cotton cloth under the oil;
and the patient's joints are in your hand and place your thumb showing above the medicine, and press it gently every time the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, for he feels stinging also as if from fire.
When you have done all this, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the stinging is gone, then lift the cloth away, and put it back as you see the paper lifted up just like if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by cutting; and if so, then it is well.
But not so, then one should still apply more medicine to the wound or where the medicine has no effect, until all your works are equal and your eyes are in order.
Then apply a damp cotton poultice in butter as long as the burned area is covered, after curing the wound of ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to beware well of your work with great caution lest there be no harm done to the patients.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hair pricks in the oil, then restart the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before. after it has been cured until it is healed;
and that is the shape of the fern of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to how they are constricted;
and the right way is not shown to him whose study is this art.
I think I've reached the end of the text! The last line is simply "de la cure de fistule par cautere", which translates to "of the treatment of fistula by cauterization". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterize according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and hold the surgeon's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or change its position;
then put damp cotton in egg white or in pear juice on the eye;
after that, warm the fire cauterizing instrument which is thus:
and shape it to fit the head like a feather from a vulture, along with the fire cauterizing instrument;
if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
but still, this one that is shaped is good for your work.
After pressing the fistula is opened, and pulling out the pus, and drying. and if it is closed, then work on it, and pull out the bowel;
after apply hot fire to it strongly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the nose near the eye, so that your hands do not act foolishly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, then it would be good. If not, then start the cautery again once more, or if you need to, and let it be for three days;
after I put a moist cloth on butter and let the treatment of drying ointment continue until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king will follow according to what he will come into his chapter.
And there is a method of fire cautery for a fistula that none of the ancients said. You understand a fistula, and close the opening; after that, put in the slit a subtle camel's hair of which it is the form: and make it to the quantity of an inch of linen; and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and do not let the patient move until the linen piece is applied to its place;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's wound a moistened cloth, either in the shape of eggs or in an awn;
the linen piece so closes the opening of the fistula, and the wound by marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the neck, and bring back the fistula to its proper place in the neck.
I think I've reached the end of the text! The last section is titled "des crevaices en levres", which translates to "about cracks in lips". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section. Often there occur cracks in lips that are called "hairs", and likewise in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing knife according to this form:
and set it in those crevices as quickly as possible until it becomes a poultice;
after that, cure the wound with cerate until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the jaw or in the uvula or the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after having made a purulent discharge and rot and has been envenomed and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit. then it is necessary that you make the fire cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the hole or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron comes to the bottom of it, and in its rear.
and do thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and this does not help, then place the patient's head on your shoulder; after apply the fire cautery whose form will come hereafter in such a manner that you put a cord on the tooth;
and put hot hastenings into the cautery and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lift up your hand and begin again the cautery according to your pleasure;
after fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let them keep it for an hour and rich fever.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums made soft restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When the toothache comes from cold or warmth, whether it is hot or cold, and medical remedies do not help, then there is need for a fire cautery in two ways: and butter cauterization and fire cauterization.
Butter cauterization is such that you take butter from a cow, and shape it into an iron or earthenware spoon. Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent needle, and soak it in melted butter, and apply it to the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools.
And thus do this often until the virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the buttery wool and cotton are cold, then apply it to the aching tooth, and apply hot iron so that the fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
The fire cauterization together is such that you take an iron or earthenware cauldron, and it should be large enough so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth.
After the burning of the cautery, from which the form will come after this, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the application of this cautery, and then wash it away.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery on whatever part of the head you want, and according to what you can.
and this is the form of the chain:
of scrofulas When scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn the cautery with hair from which this form comes, and have two openings for the fumes to issue at the other part.
and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it comes to the edge of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply a wet cotton cloth wrapped in butter until the burning sensation is removed;
after that, treat the joint with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moors prevail on the pores of the person, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be cleansed first with soluble medicines;
then apply a cautery to the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn with fierce heat but only slightly.
After this, perform another cautery at the neck of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" which we have described previously;
and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and every illness of the pomegranate are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or heat, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the forehead in the veins. and another cautery between the breasts.
and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the form described before.
And if you see, make a cautery in piercing all the cautery that is called "point" of which the form is described before in the illness of the ears.
and let the points be just up to thirty, or around that.
After treating the limb according to what is said beforehand, and make the cauterization of three rinses according to this form:
And because of this are the cauterizers lighter, because you do three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then have the patient lie down on their back and on their side. then lift the cure that is inside the little thing with your left hand on the patient's back.
and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the fire cauterization which has two needle prongs in this shape.
and cauterize the cure until it pierces just to the side, and then come the figure of the cauterization together with four cauterizations.
and therefore it is made cauterization with the cauterizer that has three prongs, because the figure of cauterization is six cauterizations.
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and that is the shape of the cauterizer with three prongs.
And at no time is added to this one nerve for which there are eight cauterizers.
After putting on the cautery, burn powder with silk. after making the patient rest and not moving the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little things happen then, and make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterizing nail, or many cauterizations in piercing.
For the joint is refastened, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach, as long as they expel it to his complexion, and many cathartics are multiplied in him, and customary cure methods do not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, stretch out his legs and arms. Then make three cauterizations below the navel of the belly to the quantity of an egg, with all the cautery clavicle, and two cauterizations outside on both sides until the shape of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they will not be joined together when they will give birth.
and be the cauterizations so deep that they reach the two parts of the kidney, and be the shape of the cauterizations according to this form without adjustment.
And if you see a great cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
and that person who has fear of this cauterization, cauterize in piercing and sign above the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see in advance. Then cauterize all the cautery which is called "points".
After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
When pain comes to the liver from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is greatly removed from its natural constitution by excesses; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and it does not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be strengthened on his habit; and mark three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the ribs of a man come;
and leave a space between each cautery the thickness of an egg; and let the cauteries be long in the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cautery;
and burn only half of the key, and let the patient be upright on his feet;
and if he cannot, then sit up, stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms;
And if you wish, then cauterize with the cattery, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the way through the skin, for you would cause the whole body to dry out; and let it come just to boiling, for the skin is very subtle thereabouts, and you know well how it should be.
When he has an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane; if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels pain that is not too strong;
and if it is in the membrane, then he feels unbearable pain.
And then when this treatment was being done by the midwives, it is necessary that the patient be covered on his head.
and then sign the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, because that is its shape. And cauterize with the cautery until the keys are burned, and come just to the spleen, until the purpuration is all cured.
after the cure according to the treatment of sores until he is healed.
and it is not necessary that anyone but he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and through whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Then he can boldly undertake it; and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
of the cauterization for pleurisy
The ancient ones say that one should make purulent cauteries with the roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: Take a root of aristology long, the largest you can find, and it should be dry, and also as big and as long as you need; and soak it in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize with a cautery between the forceps and the neck, and two small cauterizations a little lower down in the part that is below the beard;
and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind; and one cauterization in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the ribs of the breast after the cauterization that is between the two shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but rather hold it openly just as in smelling.
And it is said by some ancient that someone should use fire cauterization to make the abscess resemble a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and let go of the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse.
When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have said with divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three manners of cautery that are all good.
Of which one method is that you make three cauterizations, or four, depending on the length of the mole, according to the figure of the liver cauterization that we have said before.
and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization, and let the patient be mindful of his back.
and another method of cauterization is that you scrape the cauterization which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the cure which is near the mole, or the patient's cut comes towards the left side, and be the elevations of which you lift the cure according to the cure, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
After putting the two nerves inflamed until the kidneys are perceived from the other side, and then proceed with the fire cauterization, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
After the treatment when he has gotten full recovery for long time, and this is more than the others of the treatments before said.
Fire cautery does not succeed with an hydropic, except by the manner which is called "asclytes".
When you cure it according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the bladder, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast. and let the cauterizations be well near the spine of the kidney.
After leaving the cauterization open to get rid of bad humors for a long time, and not abandoning the patient's cure after the cauterization. and healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's aid.
The form of the fire cauterization for the belly is the key that we have shown before. and this one for the back is olive-like, according to what it has been placed here before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the wrist bone and the pinky finger. and hold your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn around.
And do not enter too far in depth, thus the fire would come to a halt, and let the cauter be according to this form:
Then do two cauterizations on each leg, at the tip of the wrist bone. and the long cauterizers, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, on the leg.
and leave the cauterizers there for a long time until the water inside flows out.
After the healing of other wounds that we have said.
When a flux of the belly comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the vital and digestive faculties which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of treatments. and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken here before about the stomach cautery, by means of circulation. and four small cauterizations around the mouth, subtle as each one is a small nail, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the navel, and one on each vertebra, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and are composed of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and they are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit, so make cauterizations. On top of the spine on the back, that which is entirely below the almond-shaped protrusion and gradually decreasing in a triangular shape, and one fire cautery below the lip two fingers' width.
And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees his face swelling, then on the face one does a great fire cautery on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for all the cautery to be done. and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treatment let the limb remain until it is healed.
When you cut the ulcer, if the cautery appears to be razor-sharp, then put it all afire on the cut ulcer. and leave your hand there until the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, because the blood will flow.
do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, then cauterize each one as we have said. after the treatment of ointments benefiting as long as they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a great fire on the aloes, it will have greater aid.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When a fistula comes and is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then you should probe the entire tent-like opening and take note of how deep it goes.
After the fire that seems rough has cooled, and you apply it to the abscess according to the amount that the liquid has entered, and restart the fire until those corrupted parts are burned, once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount of need.
and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins.
if the abscess goes to the bladder and into the intestine, be careful of those parts, and do not apply fire except on a well-greased area, and think that it is not perilous.
after curing the area until it is healed, and if the area is swollen, and the matters are removed over a long time, then know that the area is entirely healed.
and if the matters are not removed, know that the bone is twisted, and the bones at the fontanelle are corrupted. and thus as one of those we will say in its place.
When the pain of cold comes to the joints, and from great humidity, and does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cauterization on the joints from one side and the other, at the clavicle cauterization that we have previously mentioned.
and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will make greater help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then he makes a cauterization on the part in front of the bladder, where the hair of the pubic region begins, and there is one to the right and one to the left, and each cauterization should be as long as the nose of a pea.
and do the fire cautery behind the back, or two if you need them;
and make the cauterize nails according to the form described before.
When the menses are cold and moist, and do not cease to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary to do three cauterizations around the mouth, as we have said for the caustic of the bladder, and two behind the back;
and make the cauterize nails, as we have said.
When the thick discharges descend to the back of the haunch, and because of this, it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the hip is longer than the other when measured together;
et is found the lead of the department view, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the thigh near the armpit with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign in front of the lead around the thigh as it turns, so that the thigh is within the circle;
and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, make three large ones on the olive-shaped part, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the bells.
and cure it until it is healed.
Of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the thigh near the armpit, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick, foul-smelling pills or other similar pills. After this, do a fire cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: it means together burning medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is such:
that you cauterize on the back of the heel three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and great, and have between each cautery a space as wide as a thumb, and be olive-shaped.
one never makes a cautery in the middle of the back of the head, therefore there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then you should cauterize at the circle cautery that we have said before in the dislocation of the back.
but make it so that the circles contain all the haunch, and all the spokes of the wheel are burned.
And that is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain remains in the haunch and does not reach as far as the hip or as far as the leg.
And if it comes just to the hip and leg, make two cauterizations there where the patient says that the pain holds them, and one cauterization above the ankle four times, on the left side a little.
and let the cauterization be cutaneous, and let the spokes of the wheel be burned.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two inches of the foot or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points". And if necessary, do more to it.
and if it is that the pain is below the knee towards the hip, then make a cauterization at the cutaneous or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations so as not to leave the cautery too long until you burn the nerves and great arteries, and do not cause more great annoyance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left them so that the leg was all inflamed, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted through all the feet. After a purging of the stomach from which he died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a fire cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the wise men say in the cauterization of the groin, that is how it is done, make such a fire and let it be at the head as big as a walnut or a little less, and let it be between two fingers and let it be from one finger to another the distance of an egg's width.
And let the fingers be separated by two parts, and let them also be like hazelnuts, and it should have one good piece of iron well made.
and that is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the boil of the patient's groin, and let it be turned above the right side.
and let it cauterize once only after the first cauterization, and leave it for three days; and then apply butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; After the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Allbuchasium says that we should use little of this fire cauterization for fear of its regard, and if we see few who use it;
and yet those are good cauterizations that can be endured by him where it afflicts.
The burning cauterizations of medicine are those that you make an instrument to fit between the edges of the door, and it should be made of iron or earth for one part to be long, and in the height have two noses, and between each have the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and be open on both sides, and come together together according to this form:
After put the poultice of the haunch on the lying patient's sound side, and then place your hand most above the poultice of the haunch. After gathering between the two circles of hot water that is heated over the fire pot, and let it be an hour's time, and suffer the patient to endure the heat and burning.
For it also finds a stinging like fire;
and when the stinging is passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the cloth of soft water, and let it be thus three days, and put on butter until that which is black from scorching is removed. and leave it three days so that purging may ensue;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as long as they are healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that holds water according to what you did in the same way.
and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and hot water, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small hole through which the tip of a razor can enter;
where there is a small hole through which the tip of a razor can enter; and place it in another pot well weighted, and place sulfuric alkali and hot water above, so that there will be two layers of powder on top; then you will have it well prepared for your hand.
and let it remain thus until the hot water and sediment or weighted pot descend; then take all that water, and pour it on the heat and alkali as before.
And then it will be very hot and prepared for administering in medical operations and other cauteries.
For it works as well as fire, and if there are other medicines that one cures well by cauterizing the skin thus with testicle and myrrh and cardamom with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his hainche and sciatic vein, and he highly praised it, and said that no other cure was made, and he became well only once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself just as it is taught hereafter.
And instruct in this manner that you take green tartrate of fresh and dry earth, and crush it well with a little piece of grease, and apply it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it.
and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel any more burning.
And then make him enter into a bath until his body is somewhat warmed up, and then make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away altogether and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use a fire cauterization on such medications unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair fires, it helps a lot.
and one must make the cauterization in this manner. Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the other one which is called the fleshy part.
Then take dry goat's hair, and set it on fire until it is coals, and apply it to the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished.
and do it again in this way, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is ceased.
and this manner of cauterizing is called "cautere de chievre".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or striking or excessive evacuation or similar signs of cold matter spreading, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be rid of fetid pills or others similar ones, that one makes them on their back, where the pain holds, three lines marked out in wax, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and it should be done with the cauterization called "points".
and if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the middle of the cauterizing nail according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow, strained look when they wake up, and fear. and you find in the last vertebra of the back and on it the appearance that comes over other vertebrae.
When you see this and you see it cured, then cauterize it with the "celcle" cauterization according to this form. So that the fire cautery may penetrate each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a fire cautery that pricks 2 lines or 3, and have the points close to one another.
After curing the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in a place of giltosity which is near a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is due to moistors that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner:
Make the heat of the cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-like according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery all over the cautery which one calls "point". And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, then make a cauterization on each knee three times or four from each part, with all the cauterization olive-like;
and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand back longer than until the sparks of the iron are burned.
And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines;
and if there remains no pain at all, then make a puncture on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if pains come as far as the shoulders or as far as the armpits, then cauterize each part, and make good management of the patient and administer medicines.
For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When ulcers come in inguinal areas, and the bowels descend to the groin and it's newly so, then it is necessary that when you see them being cured, do not interrupt him that day. and make him do things that loosen the belly, so that the flux descends from his belly;
after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his loin cloth until the bowels are restored, and then lift it up to your shoulders, and mark an incision below the ulcer on the bone of the elbow, and all around a sign like the half of a circle above the body.
Then heat the fire cautery to its form:
as long as he is white and gives senseless statements. Then reset the bowels to their place; and the attendants hold their hands above so they do not return backwards;
and work well on the patient's hips, and place under them a cushion and a servant above the hips, and another one above the breast who holds their hands;
then place the fire cautery on the sign at the tip of your finger, and hold it steady and straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so continue again another time until you have reached the bone; and be careful subtly lest the bowels should burst when you do the fire cautery; lest you burn it; and that by this the patient does not die or suffer another evil.
And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that children's cauterizers are subtle according to their size, and for large people also large according to theirs.
After three days of treatment, remove the scab from the cauterized area until the inflammation is gone.
After treating other ulcers until they are healed, and have the patient lie down on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed.
And it is necessary that his nails be left long, so that the bellows do not ring out when he is about to go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a bandage well made brought to him, and let it be worn for another 40 days.
and have good rest, that he not overwork himself and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and too loud shouting.
and when he does this teaching then he is completely healed.
And I will say afterwards the treatment of cutting in this chapter.
When ulcers come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then the fire cautery is done according to its quantity, and it is burned a third part of the way down. after the cure as we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized at the fire to three angles according to this form:
but first mark the edge of the incision and make a line above the ulcer's width, and another below it, and then insert your hand into the entire cautery channel.
But the first cauterization is lighter and more tedious.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, and virtue, and its location in terms of torments and pain.
if he is healed from the first cautery, it is well;
and if he does not, start another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that one should change to the member that is nearest, so it is necessary that you do cauterizations until the patient is healed.
The members are aided sometimes by a cauterization with great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you not see it being cauterized, take heed if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not descend nor leave anything behind, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then make five cauterizations on the head. I move the head forward, and the other [joint] toward the forehead to the end of the hairs. and two above the two horns, and one behind above the haughty person;
and let your hand be so still that the cautery comes just to the bone, and stays until the scabs fall off, so that the vapors of the great humors can come out;
and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the swelling is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize with the fires of these cauteries which we have said above, and one in the head, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one great one on the scapula and another below, and two on the two shoulders; and II on the sides, and II on the tendons of the back, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands;
and beware of nerves that are on the backside calcanium, lest you burn them;
and sometimes make a fire cauterization on the bone of the fingernail, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that when I make more cauterizations, it helps the patient more, and brings greater profit;
and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cauterization as healthy people do, because the body is already quite corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Afterward, wash with flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is healed.
When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then one makes cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
and let the cautery be slightly inserted into the flesh of the heart; then apply ointments as long as they are healthy.
And at times one does a cautery to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the swelling is removed.
and no one should intervene in this case unless they are familiar with the members and the exit points of the nerves moving through the body.
When the disease called "albaras" has taken hold, and the medical art is of no use, then cauterize with a cautery a little bit deep, according to the thickness of the flesh of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
then apply a poultice of flour and vegetables with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and the blood of colander and almond, each one in its part. And let them all be together, and be tied with a bandage, and be at rest at the same place until they are healed.
the treatment of chance by cauterization
When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the border of the chancre.
And yet the sages say that one makes a fire cauterization in the middle of the sore;
and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen at times;
and a more right thing is that he be cauterized around, at the cauterization which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity that it causes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see hastening to die: then one cauterizes around with many small cauterizations in pricking; after that, let it be so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with what is called "the form":
And put your hand in the midst of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the kernel, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this way that the course of the purgation may be guided.
Afterward, care for him until he is perfectly healed.
Another manner of disease there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a wasting away of the member, for it wastes away members just as fire dries out dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can suffer a burn together with fire, then file the cauterizers small and great, according to what is needed at the place or where the disease is;
after that, cauterize all around until you have removed all the corruption, and there remains nothing of it, except for what is corrupted to be cut out.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas a poultice with oil until the fire's burn marks are removed, and all corruption is gone.
After the healing of ointments brings forth flesh.
And if after three days healthy flesh does not form, it is good;
and if not, then recauterize on what remains of the corrupt places.
And this remedy is sometimes cured by medical treatment in place of fire cauterization;
but all the same fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of hot remedy in the section: take what you need.
of boils that come to the feet Many times it happens that on the feet due to a defect there arises a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big swelling that hurts the foot.
And the cautery of this disease is according to two manners. It is to know fire cautery and water-hot cautery.
Fire cautery is when you forge a cautery like a awl of beechwood, and it should be made from good iron to the measure that it can pierce through all parts, and have subtle edges.
then place everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail. and leave it thus for three days until it begins to putrefy. then make a poultice of wild mulberries crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out by its roots.
Then treat the joint with oil anointing it until it is healed.
And if they are converted by a defect of the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, so you should bring cauterization with hot water; and it is in this manner: Take a piece of bone or iron, or a quill from a plover, and place it on the nail and the almond, that is to say, small white patches; and place the bone so that it surrounds everything, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand going around so that the edge of the bone comes to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water way deep down to the root;
and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it so, and it will peel off completely to its roots.
Soften one after another, until you have extracted all those inside the body, then treat the sores that produce flesh.
When some tremble from cold or hernia or quartan fever or another, then you must make four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each spine. and one cauterization on the belly, and one above the stomach at the olive-shaped cauterization;
so let it tremble, and hasten will be the health of the cold disease.
Sometimes apparent on the surface of the bathed body or foul pus comes from great corrupted matter.
it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes a cauterization on each head of the pustule; one subtle cauterization with birch bark or by which the point is seized by fire, or with a long Aristolochia root, or with the lentil-shaped cauterization.
And at the beginning, one cauterizes them according to this manner, and they cannot grow forward anymore, but are broken off the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there occur great hemorrhages of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the forefront, or at the incision of an abscess, or at a member's cautery, and similar things. and it is very grievous to staunch.
And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until the blood is pacified below your fingers, and no more drops.
then set the cauterizers of olive oil on fire, small and large, until they are all red.
then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and put the cauterizer on that vein where you are holding your fingers, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauterizations that are in the fire.
And do not cease to perform these one after another until the blood is exhausted.
and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is below, and that no other harm comes upon the patient;
and know that when blood flows out of the artery, one cannot well repress it even if the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have said: or by cauterization, or by extracting it when it is not yet treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stop blood; and be tied and held tightly in place.
Whoever thinks to stanch blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, will not profit unless the cauterization is not good.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, then one should put their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten with cold water frequently until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped.
and make inquiries ahead of those that have need of cauterizations and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all disease where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or with hot medicine, and the methods, reasons, and forms of cauterizations.
and I have placed that chapter at the beginning of the book, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way for those who find it more readily what they desire.
And therefore as I begin this, dear friend, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many ways of people come into cures. those who are so tormented by their disease that they would die quickly because of the suffering they find in their illness and the greatness of their malady. and one should be afraid of these things.
And from these ones who give you sense and say: Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of and can take and gain.
and use prediction and indication in the treatments of your sick to whom salvation may be converted;
and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and praise.
Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to be filled with the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauterizations, which I have divided from the beginning up to here, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this disease comes often to children during childbirth, and when the midwife constrains the child's head too tightly.
and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause because one doesn't know.
And I never saw this disease outside of children, and all those that I have seen died suddenly. and for this reason it seems to me that I should stop working on such cures.
And I saw an infant whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be borne.
and the moisture was so great that it killed him, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the spine, between the skull and the bone.
and the works are such that if moisture is between the bone and the muscle, and abscesses are small, you should cut a wide incision in the head.
and it should also be as long as two of us, as long as the moisture runs.
and see to the shape of the spatula-like thing:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that each part of the head's commissure is open, and the water jumps forth greatly when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you. so you should cut three incisions into the head in this manner:
And after incising, extract all moisture away. After binding the incisions with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, and leaving it like that until the fifth day;
Then loosen it, and treat the wound with tenting and ointments, and let the head be strained to the same extent, and then let the patient eat dry meat without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incising is to look at where the swelling of the abscess lies, and the gathering of water.
for sometimes it is before; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the filling of water, and make it according to what you can do.
and be careful that you don't cut the artery; and let flow a vein of blood, so that the patient may die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is fire cauterization, by cutting off the two arteries.
It is then necessary, when you see them cut, that the patient put their head back; after the wound is rubbed with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck all the way down to the cloth; Then look where the vein lies, and the ears of one side and the other are after the ears, and they are not responded.
Then mark the ears with a stain, then cut one and the other with a sharp instrument of two parts, so long as the vein comes up to the bone, and let it be by the length of the head.
And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting just like two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, blood will spring forth continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the sense, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark with a stain and make up to the bone;
and as much blood as is necessary to put forth if it is six cubits, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery;
Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone's point of the syphac, then cut what abscesses do not come there, and then strain the wound and tie, and the ointment treatment until it is healed.
of migration When ancient migration comes, and acute catarre, due to excessive moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old-fashioned foreskin and similar things, and all medical treatments by various methods of medicine do not help him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have counted.
The manner of extracting them is that the patient makes his hairs on his temples recede, and pays attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is more readily responded to than in some men who are too cold.
And if it is responded to, then the patient tightens his neck with some cloths, and then rubs the joint with a rough cloth, and raises the joint in warm water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula which has this shape: Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then pinch it high up and carefully separate it from the layers that are below each part.
And if the artery is thin, then turn it at the tip of the needle, and cut from that part according to the quantity of two joints. Since she is not cut, the blood does not flow at all.
And drain the blood of six cups, up to three;
and if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it in two loops with a strong double thread of silk, so that no clot forms before the wound closes, and blood flows freely.
then remove the excess that is between the two loops at the same time, and then, if you see fit, use a cutellated cautery to cauterize the area up to the bone until the ligaments are cut.
and that is the main work if the patient has no fever and is of warm constitution. For cauterization helps to end moisture: therefore it is of greater help for moistures.
Or, when extracting arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put a well-made tent over it.
and when they are freed, one should take care of dry medicines that produce flesh and tents, until he is healed.
and if there is no blockage of the artery as long as you work on it, then hasten to cover with a cauterized cloth, or apply vitriol to the place and strain it in your hand so that the blood is stopped. and if you don't have that present, then put a poultice on the place as long as the blood is frozen, and apply cold water to the place until the bleeding ceases, and strain it as needed.
And it should be that between the two knives there is a space of about an inch, and then when you have signaled to close the two levers, and then apply the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two parts. and let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not solidified by this fire cautery from end to end;
and that is the shape of the cautery:
and what is more effective and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizing blade cutting into two parts, but the blades should be well spaced to withstand their heat longer. For when the cuts are too dense, they retain less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the forehead of the head and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that is done, and you see the patient's face turning red, and feeling a numbness on the forehead as if in terror; and when they are warm and moist so that the hairs of papyrus are fallen, and the papyrus is scalded and burned by the heat of tears, it has need of this remedy. And the ancients called it "contused cure", and is that you do to the patient who has this disease, making three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "contused cure", and is that you do to the patient who has this disease, making three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead; and be one of the incisions also like two do inside the forehead going down to the nose and the others two by the sides above the papers and take care of not cutting into the arteries that are on both sides above the papers;
and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones and be each wound the quantity of three fingers across the joints;
and have prepared a piece of sponge and wet it with cloths to absorb the blood, then thrust the spatula in two parts as this is its shape:
from the incision which is above the temple down to the second incision; and scrape out all the kernel which is between the two incisions to the very surface of the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision down to the other second one, and then draw this spatula out. and insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape.
And set the cuticle cutting towards the fatty part at the heart, and the cuticle soft towards the bone, and pull it so that it comes to the middle opening.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where the bone appears, and then do the same on the middle opening up to the other opening.
and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the place for the taken blood;
then put a cloth of old cotton in each opening, and place moist cloths soaked in wine, oil, and ale on top, and make sure that pustules do not form there;
and on the third day, release the bandage, and immediately administer a great amount of cold water, then apply the balm of basilicum with rose oil, and other remedies used for wounds, until he is healed.
When someone comes with a great catarrh as usual, and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening sight, and burned paper; and the hair falls out, and in the forehead there is intense pain, and the patient groans; then you know through these accidents that those materials and the cautery do not come forth from many voices, and the mother takes care of what is there, so it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to raise his forehead, then make a great gash in the forehead, and another of moderate width. And begin at the left side of the forehead to the right, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and remove your hand from the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is exposed, then wipe out all the blood with a sponge, and then cover between the two lips of the wound and put old linen cloth, and try linen; then lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses;
when it is opened, then you should rub the bone until flesh begins to form, then treat with things that bring forth flesh.
In such a manner: Take two parts of barley flower, and four parts of safflower, and make an ointment. and administer it to these wounds so that the flesh may heal throughout.
Of the stopping up of the ears
Everything that drips from the ears is one of the four things: or stones, or iron splinter, or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as jasmine, vetches, peas; or flowing things like water and vinegar and similar substances.
When it settles in the ear or another way that does not belong to the ear and does not grow there, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, if it yields any drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then apply an extraction; and make it sweat with condiments, and stop the nostrils when the sweating comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and it extends above the ear.
Many times harm comes from this treatment;
and if it does not come, then administer extraction with fine tweezers, of which there is the shape:
If it jumps forth at the tweezers, that's good;
if not, then administer extraction with a fine thread of small doubling;
and if it does not jump at that, then make a leaden chain and insert the end of the chain or ear plug into the hole in the ear very strongly, and stop what is around the chain with soft wax so that blood cannot enter with the chain; then pull it forth firmly, for many times harm comes as we have said;
and if it does not come forth in this manner, then take fat of which takes the birds, and put in some instrument that is sharp to do so, and wrap a little cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and draw forth.
And if she does not jump away from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear before the abscess appears and spasms.
and the manner of cutting is that you first let the patient's cephalic vein bleed and extract the blood according to its power, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty part or dependent part. and make the incision like a moon, as long as you come to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth.
and care for it until it is healed.
And if it's pus that forms and swells, then administer an extraction;
and if he cannot get out, administer a spatula-like instrument held subtly according to this form: and bring an incision of that kind.
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist from the ear moisture, until you have made many pieces;
then strain it through subtle pincers and a press, just as we said, so that the extractions are light.
In the water then that runs into the ear, it is fitting for the patient to use an external poultice first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be bound on that very ear itself where the water is. If she jumps away because of this, it's good.
if not, take many pieces according to the length of your should be held tight and light, and heat them a little in the fire; and put the patient's ear orifice in your own hand, and lift up from below with his fingers on the other side, and strike with another instrument on top of the bone that is in the ear; and do not stop striking one piece against another until all the water flows out, and thus it jumps all out;
and if you see, then take the stick, and put one end in the ear, and the other end is pressed with fire until the stick is well burned.
then redo the other side of the sticks as long as all the water has dripped out, just as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal, if it is small, such as a rabbit and similar things, treat it just as we have said in the division;
but if it is large enough to be felt, then make an incision with forceps. and that is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of moles from the ears, when you have treated it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: If there is no opening anywhere, then treat them with delicate tweezers, and if not, take the cord that has the form here.
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then pull strongly on the cord. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, then wrap around the cord with cotton as I said in the stone.
And if they do not emerge as we said, then administer distillations as the ancient ones have proved in the killing of worms, and you will find or treat about distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, according to the form that is here, as you see: And whether it is of silver or of lead, large below at the small holes, and above for distilling.
and to press inside the distillation by the lead instrument well-made for this, and if you see take the file and envelop it around the point advantageously with cotton. then pour in your oil or juice, and as much of your medicine as you see fit in the cane, and the cane be in the ear.
then insert into the file all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or flows from the ear. and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillation be heated by fire so that it can be distilled in the ear. and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping up of the ears
No child is born without any hole in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through the bursting of a wound or the growth of a tumor within the ear, and these burstings sometimes go very deep into the ear so that it cannot be seen;
and sometimes the hole bursts forth again, and one sees it well.
That which goes very deep and cannot be seen is a serious wound in many dispositions, and what can be seen requires that you place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity appearing, then the work is all in this space where it takes its shape:
And let it be gently and carefully placed before and behind all smooth, so that it does not hurt the ear;
The skin of the opening is of bone or flesh of the ear, so hold it with subtle pinchers and cut it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the obstructions are deep in the ear, then take a subtle razor and heat it slightly with fire, then put it into the ear canal.
If you sense the opening that makes the patient feel sorrow to hear, pierce lightly, and beware that you do not wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian myrrh. Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with pink water, and powder it with vitriol bronze.
And if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. then care for him until he is healed.
And if the discharges of blood come forth, then dip a sponge and wring it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the discharge of blood which are found in the treatment of distillations.
This other thing that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, so you must stretch it with forceps and pincers, and cut off a spatula's width of its roots. then place it on a leaden plate.
And if it does not crack, then cauterize with the lenticular fire caustic, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth nothing.
and many times repair, so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
Of the Hellebore Many times come from the eyes things that seem like hoarfrost in their shape and hardness, and because of this is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below. The works are such:
The works are such: Take heed that the rain falls from one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know;
Then make the incision wide, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with tweezers and cut.
If you cannot cut it without piercing a little bit of parchment, it will cause no harm to the patient;
and if the wound is large, then sew it together with a suture, and care for it until it is healed;
and if it is small, then do not apply pressure, because the swelling will restore itself soon and will form flesh.
And if the rain is running down inside the ear towards the top, then reverse the parchment, and take with tweezers, cut and press from one side and the other;
and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it hurts nothing;
and when the poultice is applied, then wash the eye with salt water and care for the place where the wound will form until the patient is healed.
Of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is applied to the papers above, and this happens more in children than in no one, and it hurts very much to their eyes, and they come with catharrs in the mornings, and are unable to gaze at the sunlight because the tears rush to their eyes.
and because of this they lie down on their faces quickly, and sleep above, and have their papers below their eyelids dampened by the swelling and appearance that has covered the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the lid to your eyes and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on a stone;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then place it on him; and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the parts be assembled within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula's edge, cutting a notch of moderate width, and it should not be any larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein;
and make the skin smooth until you come to the part that contains; and in various positions comes forth from the notch, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then extract it thus as one piece of cloth wrapped between your hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread;
and beware that you do not insert into the incision, so you do not come up to all the spatula just to the eye, so you do not hurt it.
And if the exit wound does not open in the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision a little so it appears.
Then pull it out as we have said, then moisten the cloths with ale and water, and put them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such people who burn it and put it on top in order to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat it until it is healed.
And if the aposteme comes hot to the skin, then apply emplasters soothing it until it is healed.
of hairs of paper When paper hairs grow that are not natural, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring on mannerisms of diseases such as tears accustomed and softening of the papers and white spots, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes.
and there is the cure according to four manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medication according to what is before this chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canines, according as I shall say.
It is necessary to put the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
If she is converted, it is good; if not, then put an needle on all the thread above. and let it be on the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow at those hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
then make in the part below the paper, below the adjacent hairs, all along the scapular region, from the great wound to the small one.
then pull out the thread, and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then draw on the paper an image of a hedgehog, like the shape of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see to unfold the paper which is divided in all.
And if someone has need, they should take a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened.
Then make a small spatula on both sides of the two lines that you have marked, and begin to smooth out the great lump just a little. And be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the thread in one of the two corners of the leather, then scrape all.
Then assemble the two lips with a stitch of an needle and all the thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make sure to remove any excess threads on both sides of the stitches for any sticky things, if you see that.
And if not, don't bother with it, then leave the stitch and threads for three days or four.
Then treat the wound without sewing or constraining things, for the paper comes to life at the suturing of the wound and its assembly, but sewing is deadly (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear. and if in another way:
and if in another way: and it is that you sew the paper in a shape which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, in three separate sections, according to the form that is here:
then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, take a needle with one thread and push it into the shape. and push the other thread through the large border, and the second thread through the small one, and tie them together between your two threads equally.
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above which you have sewn, as we have counted, then tie the two lips of the wound with sewing, and care for it until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to the incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar calming ointments.
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the parchment is converted:
so you should use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and in the other is more artificial.
The treatment of the sinews is according to this form: and that you should transform the parchment and the hole within according to what I have said, then make two sinews by art, and two subtle ligaments as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and tie the two knots of the two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the parchment of oil, and strain the two sinews of the two parts together; and let it remain thus for some days, and the skin that was stretched will die and wither and harden, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, if it is bound by some strength, then let the wound be treated until it is healed.
and when the wound is closed, and if the skin has been lifted up, and they can no longer be pricked by hairs.
and this is the shape of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
the works are such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of soft and subtle silk. then tie the knots together and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length.
then order another fine thread of silk briefly, and knot the ends of the thread.
Then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
and let it be done in the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and small work; then insert the needle into the root of the hair joined together, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you move it above the natural hair.
then pull out the hair up to the needle, and insert into the needle that hair, if there is one, two, three or more.
then pull out your hand until the hairs come forth all along the needle in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the needle is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the needle from below all the thread that you have arranged, until the needle comes forth from the orifice above and you see it by the sight of the eye.
Then if you draw the bowstring and thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hairs grow back in their place and the skin heals above.
And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from the nearest goat's natural growth, and be joined with it or leave it, until they grow out and then lift it.
Of the dimness of the eye. When this disease called "aleacrati" or the purtification comes into the eye, there are two ways.
one natural and one unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and from similar things.
And the manner of treatment is that you cut open this swelling, and separate the lips of it, and put inside linen cloths, and tie it until it is healed.
and it is not necessary that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. If you do this, then the illness will return worse than the first one.
but the work of soft things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or high and flaxseed be cooked, and the anointing with dissolved aquilion in some oil, and wrapped in a tent, and the treatment for these.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you give yourself guard so it does not harden at all according to its former form;
and these works that we have said are far from the remedies for this disease, so it does not return according to its former form.
This illness that truly is called "axacrati" below which is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds and gashes and cauterizations and similar things;
and the method of treatment is that you take a needle with a doubled thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left armpit to the right, so that the thread comes out through two joints of the flesh;
Then is the flesh above to all the needle, and the cut to the spatula wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should be, it is good;
if not, then take the razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits or one on each side within the paper;
and be the edges of the two slits at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is as if it were the letter "I Greek";
then take that flesh, according to the quantity of its edges being worn away below, from what precedes the paper, then add the two severed parts and sew them with a thread of wool;
then perform the treatment for what we have said regarding softening medicines and tents until they are healed.
And if the illness comes from a break or a cut or a cauterization, then you must make a clean incision below the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is written before. then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument for every possible skill as to how they make the figure return to its natural shape.
and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various conditions.
When this stitching occurs in the same way as the paper above is sewn with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural activities, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up.
and the stretching should be done by pinching, until you obtain what is subtle in the spatula-like, which is neither too aggressive nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear if the spatula is too aggressive and damages the eye.
and your incision, which you make on the assembled part, should be done lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form.
and all that is assembled should be healed, and make no impression on the salty water of the eye, nor raise up sweet water and gall.
then put a cloth of linen between the paper and the eye, and place moist wool on the eye in abundance of egg. and after three days' use of gall and similar things until it is healed.
Know that the finger is in two manners: She is nervous and similar to a hard boil, and another one that is not at all nervous, but is similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron and heated in pincers cannot be overcome.
And both kinds of appearance begin towards the great tear duct, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head on your shoulder, then you open the eyes. and lifts up the paper to your hand, then cools it with pincers of small doubling, and stretches it above. then take a needle, and insert a hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread. and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the swelling, and push all the way through with the whole needle, and tie the swelling with a thread and stretch it above, and scrape off the rest on the side of the swelling that faces the tear duct and the silk to the hair just up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct by all the fine and subtle forces, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct as usual, so that through the incision the body will not produce tears habitually.
and sometimes the finger nails grow to the cuticle alone, and onto the thread, as we have said; then one scrapes off all the softened scab from which this shape comes:
And be sure that the scab does not touch the fleshy part and break it, and that the blister is not pierced;
and after the incision, pour a little bit of safflower oil into the wound, and make a poultice with litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat him according to what is needed until he is healed.
And if the finger is not numb, and you cannot push the needle in, and the cuticles cannot enter, this kind of fingernail condition is often cured by medicines;
and grow as I have told in the section, and if you see it cover, then anoint the patient's oil and take a light scab with a gentle poultice according to this form: And gently pull the eye upward; and if you see that it does not lessen and the reason is hastened to it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red copper oxide, and stop the eye just until the next day.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as it is inflamed with apostema, then apply a poultice and cure the hot abscess until it is healed; then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it with an ointment, and cut off a part but not all, so that the tears may not come forth.
Then distill into the eye a red collyrium made of litharge.
The eyes of some men do not always have red flesh, and it covers the pupil and holds steady above the papillae and turns away from the forehead, and seems like a rose of mulberry.
and the work is such that the patient places their head in your hand, then works the eyes, and binds all that flesh with suitable cords to it, and holds it with force;
then cut the first layer of skin, and go on cutting all the way to the razor's edge, and take care that you don't injure the eye in the work;
and let the incision be like the spatula that we have said in the incision of the ulcer and with small forces one can remove the scab, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of sainfoin broth or where you distill red vinegar and similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and put on top of the eye a cloth with egg white, so that it may be assured of an aposteme hot;
and if it remains unattended, and the blood surges up, and you doubt an abscess is hot, then leave off the eye and treat the hot abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make the sore join together in the eye by this resemblance.
But nonetheless, you should hasten the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural way; and by the accidental way, in iron work;
and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from this treatment.
Veins are red when they are covered on the eye, and tolerate the work of their sight and weaken the eye always.
It is therefore necessary for you to first look at the eye, in which the swelling is, is big, and there is no other disease besides the swelling. then cool it in this manner:
instruct the patient to put his head in your care, then stop those veins at all costs according to his wisdom, and let the veins be subtle and double according to this form:
And be two eyebrows by degree in one flesh according to this form:
then compress those veins subtly and stop the blood an hour after another, until you see those veins move away from the eye;
and beware that you do not stain the eye with the points of spittle, and do this work at the hour of noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not spoil those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains in the sable.
And if you are unable to compress everything in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are eased and you are assured of the abscess being hot, then resume according to this manner which is before, until he is healed;
and that's the form of the forces:
The physician is called "arissati" fistula:
when you cure it by cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there must be a reason in him that you cut on the abscess, there where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument that is there in its form;
and it is called "asperge chief", and be made of fine iron indented in the same chief again, and pointed like a file as it is in its present form:
And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed;
and make so that at any time, then restore the place of medicines exactives.
if the wound is bound, and flesh grows there, and the body of the bowstring is bound, and remains so for forty days, and it does not heal and is not apostemed, and no evil accident comes to it, know that it is sound.
if not, then there is no other remedy but to bring back the fistula to the bottom of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time by iron and by old medicines, and when it is uncovered take the force according to this form, and let the point of the iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be thinned out to the head as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the edge of the forehead, and remove your hand from the eye socket, then turn back to the force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the vein goes in if they hold their hand on their nose;
and then restore the place of dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh has grown and hardened the places, so the matter goes into the night. it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are fully open and there is no hindrance or decrease in the night, it is necessary that you hold the patient.
then the wound, then put poultices or hot cloths to suck, then apply on top of the eye a mixture made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla, and then strain the eye and plaster it with bandages and cloths.
and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes have need of.
Then strain above with a strong bandage firmly, and reapply the poultices to suck without hurting.
Then remove the poultices and leave the oil constricted day and night, and if the swelling increases, so it is necessary to bind tightly.
Then remove the binding after a day and a night, and if you see the oil repairing itself, it is good.
if not; so reapply the plaster and cloths and the binding and poultices until it is healed.
the bursting of the eye's skin When disruptions come to the open vein, then opening, and comes forth like little pieces of resin, and it is appalling to see.
Then if you see it closing, the operations are such that you thrust a needle into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then thrust another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the wound. and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement.
then tie the thread of the double thread around the joint and bind a part of the vein around it, and tighten it well, then pull out the needle and put on the oil-soaked linen cloth in abundance of egg white.
and leave it so that the thread takes hold with the vein, then care for the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed.
and at no time is the wound restricted by the vein each part of a cloth circle until it is healed.
And if the eyes give a great appearance, then make an incision at the subtle spatula that comes from inside the oil, and drain the moisture with albugine and lower the eyelids, and enter it soon.
then pull out when it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not except in the eye which is gathered together, resembling a water descending, and it is not water.
and the manner of appearing of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the boil come up above to your eyes. then let it be fixed, and not descend, and allow the light to fall on it, and see the patient's things as he used to.
and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the boil's descent is not prepared as we have said.
then make the patient sit in your hands, then take the subtle spatula and insert it on the keratinized skin up to a little above the conjunctiva with the keratinized membrane and crown, until the boil issues.
and when it is released, so it drips in hot clear water mixed with honey or with vinegar and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye We have the likenesses of waters in our division, and what is necessary for piercing; if one works according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind the good eye very tightly.
then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right.
then take in your right hand if the eyes are left, or in your left hand if the eyes are right, the instrument called "almagda".
Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a finger in that spot above the eye to the part of the lesser tear; then insert the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so it pierces into the blenchor of the oil, and sense that almagda comes to the empty thing.
And it is fitting that the measure of the way Almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the purl to the end of the nourishment. and this is the crown of the oil;
If you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the parchment crown, and then place the instrument just above where the water is, then press downwards on one path after another.
The patient sees water flowing now, so the patient sees it before him and the instrument is in his hand.
After resting for a little while, and if the water rises back up the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not go up, then extract Almagda gently by turning your hand little by little.
and then place in water a small amount of gemstone jelly, and leave the eye inside. Then put aside the oil that is soaked in wool or linen moistened with rose oil and a quantity of egg white, and tie it with pure oil.
Now, and those who are of our time, apply cooked broth with a lot of egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and not go too far inwards, but make a subtle hole, then put in alumada, as we have said.
and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient and doctor to come, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room.
and be still from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his condition for three days.
then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day;
and it is not necessary to do this in the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but rather you should wait, because the water rises quickly.
If an abscess appears, instruct that one to open their eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess.
and when it is appeased, then open the eye and put a poultice on their face to cover any day, and be there in that dark house.
And then go out of the dark house step by step, and turn back into one's usual state;
and know that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one came to us from the land of Yemen who told us that in their country they used to make a certain type of bandage that would help with swelling, but I have never seen any such thing in our land nor do I ever read about it in ancient books. and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are likenesses of the forms of epilepsy, because he who does not know them sees.
and are properly of stone; And let their heads be of the same subtlety, and their ends in three angled aqueducts.
No times are born or arise without diverse lumps attached, because there are some that seem like scorpions at many points;
and if it has such or is encrusted with flesh of a fiery color, and if the lump is soft of a white color. In that then of these lumps which is soft and not encrusted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that then of these lumps which is soft and not encrusted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and pour the wine onto those lumps, and treat them with fires; then apply what you can sustain to the spatula of fine cutting on one side, as long as you know that lump is entirely loosened.
And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, then cut it off with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. and if it does not bother you, or abscess forms, then cleanse it as it is fitting;
and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize it as much as the blood is poured out and all the pus is removed, then pour on some water or cold wine. If the poultice does not work, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed;
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is bone newly formed above the bone, to which instruments do not come to cut:
then it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread about an inch thick in it, and have it well greased by hand, and have between each night's space a little interval or less; and put the patient's head into the cloth of the nettle in their own power, and pull it out in an aromatic way until it comes down through the nose into the mouth;
and many times do this with children at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it;
then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after another just as we do on the cloth;
Do this as long as you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, stop the bleeding, and moisten the thread with Egyptian oil, and put it back into the nose just as before;
do this for three days or more, until the salve corrodes all that remains of flesh;
and then put on a new bandage made of linen some days until it is healed, and if he needs drying medicines, so use them;
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills the oils and medicines or bandages:
And it is of silver or of iron, resembling an open lamp like a candle, and guides also;
and if you see, make a bandage closed, and the instruments full to purge the head;
and have some cloth at the head to hold it in place when one heats the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh from the nail
Many times there occurs on the head a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great over time, until it becomes something to behold by looking at it;
and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the affected part at the beginning, and remove all the decayed matter, then put on the cauter or burning medicine;
and if you wait to cover it until it is large, then be aware if it is hard, with a faint color, poor sense:
so do not touch it at all with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut into it even once, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not with faint color, and you see that it can be fully cut away, then empty the patient and cut it away without fear, and treat the joint in things constricting and restraining.
Knows that when solutions of continuation come in one of these joint workings, it profits little, rather than in some men.
Therefore, one must then see what happens to each, so look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then place the two lips together with a suture, and then treat it until it is healed.
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their crust until they heal, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and bind it, and powder on top of powder with dragon's blood, and burn incense. and put on the powder a piece of plastery ointment or another ointment sticking together, and leave it until it cures by itself, then anoint with oil until it is healed.
The way of the stitching is that you assemble the parts: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
of the apostemes of the lips
In many cases there are within the lips abscesses that are hard and resemble grains of mustard, smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and incise on each side, and take up with tweezers and cut in each part;
then apply oil to the wound after the vitriol incision, until the blood is stanched.
and then ease the joint, and treat the bone with dry things until it is healed.
Many times a whitish substance appears on the gums which the old people call "albulus";
so it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the flow of pus or blood continue.
then put on the bone vinegar broth, or other drying and restraining powders;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, and it happens many times, then cut it again, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are foul and rough. and sometimes teeth are black and yellow and green, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell.
so you should make the patient sit in your hands, and his joints be in thy faith, and receive the teeth or scabs as they appear, until there is nothing left. and thus make a powder of blackness and greenness, and of yellowness and the other taints, until they are purged.
and if you remove what is at the first reason, it is good. unless this, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed.
and know that the teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments to remove, according as the work shows, because the scraper which one uses to remove teeth has other forms than he who uses it between the teeth. and these forms and others shall be equipped with you.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, for this should not be done hastily. for it is a very high substance just up to that point where one has no excuse for regret.
When the patient is constrained to pull, it is necessary that you are certain about the pulling tooth. Many times the pain would drive the patient mad, and think it was from a tooth of Saint, and make someone pull out the good tooth. and yet the pain does not depart from him because of this, until the bad one is removed, for we have already seen that it happens to these saints.
and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you cut around the tooth to the whole gumline strongly in order to keep the gums from all sides;
then move it to your fingers or with subtle forceps at the first pace and pace, until it is well separated, then firmly secure the forceps; and let the patient's joint be in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump forth, then take one of these instruments and insert it lightly into each part, and move it as you did first.
And if the tooth is pierced and wounded, you should fill it with cloths, where the holes are; and if you strain it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break while being strained;
and it is necessary to cover carefully around the gum for dislodging the tooth.
And it does well to guard that you do not break it, and one part remains, and returns to the patient through the wickedness of the root with greater pains than the first.
And take heed that you do not act like the foolish healers who, through their haste and boldness, sometimes break the carriage and do not bring what we have told;
but often bring great harm by the extraction of roots that remain or by breaking the carriage, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is loose, wash the place with vinegar or asparagus and seaweed;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply the place with vitriol powder;
and if that doesn't work, burn it with a cautery.
The forms of extractors, by which one removes the teeth first, should be long and pointed with thick handles, so that they do not break when you pull out the tooth;
and these are the shapes: And be of thick handles so they do not bend when pulled, and be well made of iron, and have teeth to hold in place.
of the roots of the teeth When the roots remain in the socket, it is necessary that you put a moistened cloth soaked in butter on the place for one or two days, until the socket becomes softened, and then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the head seems like a bee's stinger;
and be made inside like a file and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a scraper, by which this is the shape:
And let it be big and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out for this reason, it is good.
If not, then help yourself with all the instruments, from which forms come afterwards.
And if one uses this instrument having two handles, by which this is the shape: and other instruments that are before in proportion to the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles great forceps, by which this is the shape:
And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted.
and wise and subtle masters find by themselves the instrument that suits them best, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if it does not break on the cartilage or other bones, or wherever it can, one should seek out the instruments that are needed, as I have said, and be aided by gestures, from which comes the form.
And let them be thick and well-held to hold the bone, lest it escapes, but be able to hold and remove.
and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if it has putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, so treat it with all these instruments:
When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural shape of the body, and their form is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly grown after the previous one, and is not in its rightful place, and cannot be straightened or filed:
then draw; and if it is rough with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is shown here, and resembles a small beak, and be of iron with a sharp point in the tip:
And the file files and files a little by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and for that you do not move the others, and if it appears to be able to be filed, then file with a similar file which has this shape:
and it is also like a file used to make needles;
and in lime the tooth becomes less and less heavy day by day, so it does not move until it falls out;
then the tongue becomes smooth at the end with no roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it is necessary to file down the roughness so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the front tooth is knocked out or falls out through percussion or falling, and the patient cannot eat what they want without choking, and you have treated them with constricting medications, and this does not help;
so they must be restrained by a thread of gold, for the threads of silver become green and putrid, but the gold ones never change;
and let the middle thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et if you wish to straighten the teeth, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the head [of the thread] between my teeth, if there is one or more of them, until you come to bleeding just up to a healthy tooth on the other side. then begin the covering just to the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and bleeding, until it does not move at all.
and let your cord be tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then bend the ends of the thread into pincers, and join them together, and reattach between the healthy tooth and the toothless one, so that it does not wound the tongue.
and then leave it thus tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone or the thread breaks, then bind it with another string.
If it remained and served thus all its time, and that is the form of the teeth and the shape of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two molars, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said;
and doesn't meddle with it unless one is wise and skilled, and sometimes makes the form of a whalebone tooth, and puts it in the place where there is a deficiency, and holds it so as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
At no time does this happen that comes from under the tongue or natural origins, unless one is born so; or by an accidental wound that has been stitched up;
and the work is such that you will operate on the patient's mouth, and have their head in your healthy hand, and lift up the tongue;
then tie the ligament nervously to the wide one, so that the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, it is a sudden wound, then bind the bandage and tie the ligament.
and make sure that the incision is not too deep in front, for the artery which is below;
and when you have done that, lift the lever of rose and easy water, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue;
and keep the patient's tongue wrapped each night, so that the wound cannot close.
And if hemorrhage comes forth, then put a vitriol plaster on top of the wound; and if the blood swells, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery which is good for that; then the doctor of another doctoring until he is healed,
and if you see a boil that's yellow or black or hard, and the patient doesn't feel it, don't touch it at all, for it's a carbuncle;
and if it's declining into gangrene, and there is moisture, then one must lance it, and the pus will flow out in a subtle spatula-like manner, and deliver it from both sides; and if the blood flows against your work, then put on a vinegar poultice until it is stopped, then return to your work as long as you are treating all parts;
then lift the limb from ease and from strain, and treat other treatments until he is healed.
Abscesses of the throat Sometimes a boil comes inside the throat called "godath", and they are properly called two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then beware:
If this is a postulate of small sense and of fusel color, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the roots are large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the dismemberment of blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will take it apart, or it will break apart by itself;
and if it is of white color and the roots are subtle, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first make sure that the postulate settles down and is pacified.
Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his hands be in thy right hand, and open the mouth and take hold of the tongue between thine own hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, thereby is the form.
and it shall be of silver or of subtle lead, just like our knives:
Can you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and pierce it into the almond, and pull it away above as much as you can;
and do not take anything from the cloths with it, then cut off at the instrument, so that is its form, which seems like one of great force; and yet the head is curved, and one way against another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, which is the form: and be cut on one side and not on the other;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and hot and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water or cooked pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then the treatment until he is healed;
and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat except for the two almonds, so cut them then as the two almonds are equal.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was growing inside her throat, namely the abscess of little sense;
and I had nearly closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she stayed like that for one or two days.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two pustules through the two holes of the neck.
I then hastened and made an incision in one place, then the abscess burst open, and drew out a great portion of pus.
then I made another incision on the other side of the abscess, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue;
After applying the poultice to these abscesses, and taking out a part of it, and no more came forth except for a small amount of blood; and thus the passage of the throat in the woman was stopped, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut at this abscess for a long time;
and the abscess recrossed again, and filled the place that I had emptied, so that it became very large;
then I bandaged it and cautery was done inside the throat: and thus it stopped growing;
and I left those parts, and only God did anything with them after me.
of the vein
When the swelling comes down to the eye, and it is swollen and long, then it is called "perpendicular";
and if she is under a large and rounded one, so it is called "uvē".
When she is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess is appeased, and she is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut her out.
and that which is rounded and assembled and is not long; and she is sanguinary or of a red or black color, then it is necessary that you avoid making an incision on her. For there is great danger for the patient.
It is necessary, then, when you see her, according to the manner that I have said, of her length and thickness, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument which we have made a record of previously. then insert the pessary into the uvē, and train it downwards, and cut with both instruments which I have said in the incision of two almonds.
And it is necessary that you not cover at all more than the excessiveness that is beyond the natural boundary.
for if you cover more, you cause harm to voice and word.
and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear of being covered, you should use artifice at the cauterization to calm their fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and thin. And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses the tongue onto the instrument which we said in the chapter of cauterization, and confess with live water cold, so that it is not too thick nor too clear. and use the point of this instrument, as to which there is the form:
And have on your head a beard or place where you put the medicine, just like the hairs of a comb, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the ulcer.
and the patient should be seated on his couch, so that the saliva and spittle run from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and the wound.
then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the ulcer, for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it congealed and the pustules of the medicine are appeased.
and if you see, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the entire cotton in the sheath above, until the cotton adheres to the ulcer.
and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and repeat after 3 or 5 days.
And if you need to start again the cauterization of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cauterization, clean around the ulcer with cotton soaked in butter, and purify everything that is around the medicine.
and let it be treated with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, not the fire cautery;
if it is cured through fumigation in this manner, take calaminth and ysoop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put a little bit in it, and make it boil;
and the pot be well glazed with hard earth, and inside the pot have the instrument shaved according to this manner: And be of silver or lead, and let one of the keys be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is deadened;
afterwards it often begins again, until the eye dries, and be sure that you do not do this at the beginning of the swelling of the abscess, for many things happen there; and do not make them do anything except at the decline of an abscess.
And if these instruments are not present, take a cord and put a candle made of egg-white inside the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat. for the candle made of egg-white does not let the vapour weigh on the mouth, and it is a good treatment together with health.
Many times one uses at the throat or spine of a fish, or something else;
so it is necessary that you try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move.
and what does not open for you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit at once when the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the harsh things come out through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or a dry bread crumb; and then thread is tied to the sponge, and then it is swallowed again; and when it comes to the stomach, if it stays, then you will pull out a lot;
and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of forceps according to this form:
And be the instruments curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high upwards; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest all life come forth, nor push the bone inside;
and be careful that the patient pushes the instrument, because it is better for the thing to come out forced; If the bag is below, or he pulls it far away from all the instruments evenly, until it is far.
of the discharge from the throat
There is no bloodletting in medicine, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press his tongue onto the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the sweat, so treat it with a small bandage or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if that does not work, then take a knotted cord, and put it around the patient's throat, then tie the knot in the cord hot with fire, and do this often. And if the patient is afflicted by water all day.
then take a full view of cold water, and open the mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and if blood soon feels the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the ear;
It happens many times, for she will fall without warning.
And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where it has coal ashes, and the cover is covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole is the key of the instrument.
Then you pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the sweat.
and now the sweat falls, and if it doesn't fall, then repeat the fumigation many times;
and the patient suffers from thirst, and takes bitter and salty things, and does not drink water;
and then it becomes necessary for him to go away by means of this government.
And the shape of the instrument with which one draws out the pus is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for entering the throat; and has a resemblance to a doctor's beak, and it has a roughness like limestone, such that what it takes, it cannot let go;
Many kinds of abscess are, according to what is remembered hereafter on both sides in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
and it is in two ways, one being its own resemblance, and because of the moisture it holds.
And the second manner is for those who are at the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the fatty tissue are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if an abscess is not to be pierced, until the bow has been measured according to its completion;
and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are dry, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses which are near joints.
For when abscesses occur near joints, and one leaves them until they are rotten around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is why it is a cause of contraction in that member.
Where the abscess is below the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is mortified, it will harm the main limb.
where it is below the foundation, if one pierces it even when it is dead;
and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess that is unripe and undigested, except for the one below the foundation, lest it will not penetrate far enough and be prolonged inside, and a fistula will ensue. and cannot heal in due time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforating the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the softening and healing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
and it is necessary that you place the puncture or more dependent upon the abscess, and where it opens up movements;
and the puncture should be long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pain. Those who are bent, according to that limb.
And when an abscess is in its natural place, you should leave the opening so that it is confirmed by complete digestion as we have said.
For if you pierce before this, the body will be lengthened with blood from it, and filled with much waste matter. and by chance harden the lips and the deep parts of him.
And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limb has need of it.
And it is necessary that you bring forth small abscesses, small ulcers; and in great abscesses, great ulcers, and many splits according to the resemblance of the greatness of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to search out the cause, and cover; when it has become like a piece of cloth that is worn out and is dead, so one should do the same thing with babies:
and if it has such ones that are split into three angles, and if there are such ones which one cuts away like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses from the kidneys;
and if it has such ones where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar coping.
Those who do not have a head, like a soft and superficial abscess, it is necessary that you let them drain freely;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has gathered great pus, and you let it drain, if you do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but rather one part. then stop the abscess just until the next day, then do not touch anything above it; Do right by many times bit by bit, until the bowel empties completely.
likewise if the patient has little strength, or women bearing, or small children, or old men who are worn out. For the spirits leap away at times with the exit of the bow; so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take heed.
Then therefore proceed with great caution through this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small. and if it's a clean cut, then try to apply some linen or old cotton. and if it's a large abscess and there are many perforations, then you must pack each one with a tent so that they come together.
and if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin and you have wrapped it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or a clean cloth without moisture, and bind it just until the third day.
Then the surgeon, and the doctor of ointment, until he is healed.
And if bleedings occur in your work, so provide cold water and easy, and damp cloths, and set it on the bleeding place by many times.
And if the flowing of blood persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said to put in hands in this book, and if it is in the season of spring, and the flesh or abscess is very nervous, then you must put on tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and hot oil.
and if it is in summer, and the flesh is fatty, then you must put on wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
and then release the abscess and the pus and the wound, as it is necessary, until he is healed.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
Or when the hair of the head comes forth small abscesses, and are manners of us that are in wefts, as a tailor of a silk, and there is much of the same.
There are some that are fat and such that also have moisture like pimples;
and if there are others that are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt that the artery will not go against it.
And the work of cutting is such that you try out every instrument called an "entromissoire", from which its form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then heat it above the long one.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape away without leaving anything of the skin that contained that moisture, for it returns again if you leave anything.
then plunge in Egyptian oil if it is present; if not, then in water and vinegar, and apply the dressing to the wound, and leave it until the next day. and those who remain will run with night dew.
And then reapply the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of night dew.
Then cure the wound of oiling as is necessary, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds little fat, cut it according to this shape, from long. and scrape out the ulcers, and flay off all around, and put all your care of drawing forward from where it lies.
and if the artery does harm to you, do what I told you afterwards.
And do the same for the abscess if it is pustular, and to cut and to cure as I told you.
And cut on top of the pustular abscess and the moist one, if it is lighter, for they are full of blood. And if some of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and one of the abscesses that I cut open was on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it. and if one had cut into it, they would have made as much of a wound as in a stone.
In other abscesses coming from the head, except those that come to the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, in order for the pus to issue forth.
and it is cured as is fitting.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and below the armpits, and in some groin areas; sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are very large, and some are intertwined with each other.
And each scrofula is properly inside its own coat, like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said; and similar things to these scrofulas are many.
and similar things to these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malignant and will not obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition to be touched, and is like in color to the flesh, and quiet on each side and is not harsh against the nerves of the neck or the artery or the canal, and is not too deep.
so it is necessary that you cut above, and flay each part, and there are two lips of the key on the nodes, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et the wound is small and small, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let it not be the spatula awkwardly nor trenching, lest your hands escape, and do not look too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound a vitriol poultice, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound. and leave it so that the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it.
then look at your intended result to see if there are any small scrofulas remaining, if you cut and clean them.
And if the boil has a great vein at its root, then it is not necessary to cut that boil in its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall away by itself without harm.
Then apply the wound to old cotton dipped in Egyptian oil, then the treatment.
And if you cure the scrofula, then it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound, and sew them up now, so that there is no longer any excess remaining due to the great size of the scrofula. so it is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it, and pull tight, and sew as we have said.
so it is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it, and pull tight, and sew as we have said. Those boils that have superfluity, puncture there where it appears more.
and puncture it in the same way as the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then apply poultices with oil and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment to the raw flesh until it is healed.
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
It is necessary for those who have swallowed that the cut in the throat which is called "epiglote" should be avoided. and one does not help by doing so, because all the veins and the patient's major blood vessels are inflamed in those who have an abscess in the mouth or throat or in both testicles.
When the disease is in the channel of the body, it is necessary to cut off the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the size of the incision of the syphac, not in the cartilage.
and it is so necessary for the cutting of the epiglote that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough to drain.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full extent, then cuts the leather until it comes to the chin. and avoid shedding blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the superficies, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the splitting of the gum of the gallbladder which bursts through the broken joint and by the failure of the voice;
and leaves the open wound for a piece.
And when the hour is passed that causes doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the jaw, and sew all the way to the cartilage;
then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Abacus says one does not do this just yet until the throat is entirely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the default leads to failure. Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death;
and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four; then they command to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maid take a knife, and she thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the veins of the throat.
and I was summoned to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor led forth but the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hurried, and stitched the wound, and cured her until she was healed;
and it happened to the maid that she lost her voice, and returned afterwards to her normal state;
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish-yellow color, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two ways: naturals, and accidental;
it has no natural contrivance
And the accident is according to two manners, of which one is similar to us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and it has fear, and does not need to work on making fires except in that which is small, and examines and searches all the internal parts; if you find it just like in a wound, and cannot be helped by any means, then cut it off, as one cuts off the nose, and treat it with all its contents, if there are any; and examine well everything, and cure it as is proper, until it is completely healed.
There are many ways of wounds, all of which I will say are similar;
and it is necessary that I tell the whole difference that is between wound and abscess.
I say that warmth and fever persisting, until the ebullition is past, and the purging is complete. Then the fever and warmth subside.
With the nose having neither warmth nor fever nor pain, and containing pus which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a jellyfish, and becomes swollen.
and they are according to their appearances, either fat or moist, and much colored as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of fat, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form comes or chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of the nose is that you take or find the most moist place in the abscess, and turn your two pokers back and forth, until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the obstruction, and take care lest it jumps again.
If moisture constricts the cord, whatever its color may be, so treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after extracting the obstruction there is no moisture, know that it is fat, then treat it thusly in a cross shape, and take hold of it with forceps, and scrape it lightly on each side and watch the edge where it lies so you can lead it out safely with the needle;
and if you cannot draw it out safely, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, then it will return through many times;
and if even a small part remains and the blood teases you, then fill the wound with some caustic powders, and compress the wound, and put on soothing things, hot abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if it is great, then cut off both lips of the wound, and treat those who have been injured flesh.
and if the vein beats against you or another, and in your hurry and stress, you break off the lead of vitriol, and let it lie two days or three, until the wound has healed, and rest the boiling of blood. then return to closing what remains of the wound.
Behold the forms of the entrails mixed, and they are of three manners: great and middle and small;
and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are of three manners: great, middle, and small, in order to surround the abscesses of fistula;
and they are like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are of yellowed earth, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most tried by black lead to encircle the ravens of fistula;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pores.
The shapes of the onyches are many in semblance, as you see here:
and if the onyches have two ravens of three kinds also;
and if the onyches have three ravens, and are also of three kinds;
and if the onyches have two ravens, and onyches with only one raven, and are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these things is that one cuts, and there are some who do not cut more than halfway, from which we strip the flesh, because one does not reach the vein or the nerve.
and of these intermediaries are the apertures replied in sleeves, so that the patient does not feel a thing when opening abscesses;
and there are three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
and one does not use more than in a well-warmed place, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and in similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling scissors for flax, according to this form, by which one stops bleeding: and one puts it sometimes in the place that bleeds at the puncture of veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Breast swelling occurs in some men when they begin to be corrupted, so much that it seems like a woman's breast.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should treat according to this form until the line .b. to .g. then scrape off the fat, and pack the wound with medication allowing for some flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound by suturing, and care for it until it is healed.
and if the breast hangs down and is softened because of its size as it is in women, then cut it into two sections above, with two similar incisions. so that one is attached to the other at the end of each and contains the smaller line according to this form from line .b. to line .g. then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully closed, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the decomposition of blood, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in corrosive oil. and leave it so that the remaining and fat can melt away, then cure it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are types of hard scrofulas or boils, and some contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for it with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then make it as we have said in scrofulous cuts, and if the wound bleeds pus, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn up, then many times abscesses come to be, and so also happens with the vein inflamed and abscessed.
and if one knows this when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep inwards. and when you feel it to your fingers, then you feel its straining;
and when it is for the vein, then it is reason to flee away.
and it is foolishness to cut this abscess, and similarly when it is under the armpits and in the groin and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very great. It is necessary therefore to shun the iron treatment, and he who is at the head must also shun it, and in that which is on the swelling of an artery, one makes a cut above the long leather.
then perform the incision on the skin, and depart the artery gently from the flesh, until it is uncovered.
then put a needle under it and make it pierce to the other side, and hold the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then point to the place that is between the two lines of an instrument so long as the blood flows out which is there, and loosen the abscess.
Then administer the treatment until the bandage falls off. Then heal those wounds suitable to this, until they are sound.
And if the abscess is caused by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you take what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I told you, or tie one end of both parts to the two heads of the thread.
And if you doubt that the threads will not come out, then reinsert another needle into all the thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
then cut off the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut off the superfluidity of the wound and leave what is connected.
then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until he is healed.
Just like abscesses come in an artery and a vein, abscesses of the nerves come when they are wounded or from excessive hard work, and similar things.
And this happens more often at the joints and in the hands and in all places where there are joints, and it is grievous abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain.
and when one constrains him strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the body, but below the skin.
and it is well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor underneath or above, and the one who is in joints must not be cut with iron. by chance I shall see contraction; and he who is on the head or forehead, makes the skin at the armpit.
and he who is on the head or forehead, makes the skin at the armpit. If the abscess is small, one should grasp it with forceps and cut its root.
and if it is large, one should suspend it with an incision, and scrape it, then cut out the abscess and put together the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed.
At times it happens in bellies and not elsewhere so far as I know, and it is a disease that is called "fung" by the resemblance to mushrooms, and has subtle roots and a large head.
and there are some small ones and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, with a small root, and split open and ran with moisture.
I coped them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 Z., and the work of incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthritic area is white and moist and of fine root. If he coperets with a spatula wide, and be in your presence the fire cauterization.
If he coperets with a spatula wide, and be in your presence the fire cauterization. For when cutting comes many great discharges of blood, and if the blood flows too much, then hasten to cauterize.
And if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made flax thread, and bind the arthritic area as we have said, and let it be for two days.
and then restrain him, and do not cease to strain the flax thread until he copes with the arthritic area, and let it feel his work.
And if the roots are thick, then there is fear of cutting into the belly itself because of the wind, but you can well cut off the middle part, and then cauterize so it does not regrow;
Then cure the wound, and take care that you do not cut off the navel which is of a faint color and poor sense and with no regard for milk.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the care of ulcers later.
when the bread is burned If the appearance of the abscess comes from a cauterized wound or fissure of syphilis and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness;
and if it is from the wound of syphilis and from the issue of pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and openly shows its various issues. And if it is because of the opening of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses it at its sides it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance to the bath and from excessive labor.
And if it's because of moisture, it's a light thing, and you can see clearly when you press it with your hand, it doesn't resist at all.
and if it's because of blood, and it becomes apparent by these signs the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity. and if it's because of windiness, it is swollen when touched, and the works are such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
and if it's because of windiness, it is swollen when touched, and the works are such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the wound alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowels, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his anus, and be extended straight out, then sign in every direction around the belly. then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the spot that you have signed with all the spatula, then cut off half of the abscess above to the great incision. Then tie around it with a strong thread or a cord of firm silk tightly, and the knot should be well secured.
Then work on the middle of the abscess extended over the thread, and press your finger's indication, and pierce the intestine. If you find it taken from the thread, then loosen it, and push the intestine further out of the belly.
and if you find the bulge, then take hold of it with a forceps, and remove the excess.
and if the artery or vein is against you, go around it well, then return to your work and take two needles, and tie two thread pieces, and tie the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
then strain the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it to drain as much as possible, and let the dead flesh be separated by itself. ou you cut when it is subtle and porous, then cure what needs to be done, and leave the abscess as we have said;
ou you cut when it is subtle and porous, then cure what needs to be done, and leave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of what needs to be done, and mend the joint.
of the ulcer We have said in the division about the likenesses of gangrene, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment;
and we say that gangrene develops in the bones, and great caution is needed in the treatment, and the ancients say that when gangrene is in a joint or can be removed like gangrene in the breast, or in the armpit, or in similar joints, one should remove it all when it begins;
None were ever healed before me.
And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black cholera sometimes.
Then make him well if he has apparent fullness, then have the patient in good condition to do the work.
Then wash your fingers or chance, and shave all over, and scrape off all the hair leaving nothing.
and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or anything, and if the bleeding makes you opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped. Then treat another wound until he is healed.
De ydropisie. We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicine, and that which is cured by fire.
and one must not touch with iron in these two cases: it is to know, tympanites and hyposarchy, for it is a deadly thing;
so when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" in medicines, and the cure does not profit, if look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, as also distension of the belly and similar things; if one must not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is not too young nor too old, so you must thus proceed: lift the patient straight up on your hands, and have the attendants press on the belly by thrusting water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spine-mold according to this form: And let it be split into two parts. at the tip, and even if it is not so deep that it can reach the intestine when one inserts it, and cannot hurt it;
then look to see if the dropsy has spread towards the intestines: if it is necessary, then you must cut above the mouth of the third day on both sides under the armpit; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the mouth of the third day;
and if it is due to dropsy, then it should be on the right side, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on top of the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak place;
then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and plug it, and lift your hand to all the fat between the skin and the shank just as when cutting to the quantity of an ear or around it;
then pierce the sac as long as the pus comes out at its natural flow, and this is the sign of water, then take it away, and put that instrument in which there is the form: And it resembles a thin silver chain, and it is made of light iron or archaic lead, and has a small depression in the part below. and on one side, three depressions; and two on the other side, and one on another;
and it is the key cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision which the writers cut the quill:
at the top above is the almighty, so that when the instrument comes to water, it now descends on the instrument;
then empty then the half or the third part, because if you empty more than is needed at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of his spirit from the arm, or he falls face down, or he approaches death;
but according to empty space as the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and their hairs;
then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now because of the key that stops the perforation which is above the siphac, for which I spoke, so you pierce in this manner;
then begin the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering those things and take out a small quantity of water;
do this for some days and beware of pouring in until it no longer remains but just a little water.
And if you doubt about the patient and leave out a lot of water, if the remedy of burial or sand is hot, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and if it becomes discolored to drink; and treat with drying medicines until he is healed, and apply a fire cautery to the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting water, as I have said before.
No child is born without a perforation in the penis, or if it is small, or it is not in its place.
If this is so, then let it be done at once by piercing all the way through to the very small and subtle part according to this form:
then place the patient in a pit or hollowed out space with a subtle layer of mud, and bind him and keep him thus for three days or four, and when he wants to make water, have it opened up and let him urinate, and then replace.
and by chance it does not matter, for the urine that comes forth will not allow it to be closed.
That of which the pit is small, if it has medicines from a piece of lead, as we have said, so it will spread.
Those who do not have a perineal opening in their place are afflicted, for none are born with a perineum at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift up their penis first. and they are unable to relieve themselves because the material cannot come out just to the marriage line, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the instrument and the tip also like the size of a quill, so that the point may be in the middle, as it should.
and take care to prevent the flowing of blood which often occurs, and if it does occur, stop it with what stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Many times these blisters come on the instrument, and there is an ugly appearance of flesh.
and among them some are malignant and not malignant.
so it is necessary that you take them up with subtle vinegar, and scrape and clean all of them, then put on moist Egyptian oil. then cure him with divine ointment until he is healed.
And if the boil is malignant, of poor color and foul-smelling, then you must apply a cauterizing agent.
When you have cut it, and the skin on the shaft is in the flesh and has part inside the peel and part outside, then you must remove the skin that is inside first. and when it is sewn, then you should cure what is outside.
For when you cure it all together, then the head of the shaft is not assured that it will not be pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption in its shaft and around.
so you should remove everything that is black and corrupted, then smear on it a plaster made of honey and flour that has been prepared from the bark of green pomegranates and vetches, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if there comes bleeding, so administer the lunar cautery in this form:
The cauteries are helpful in two dispositions together: to wit, for the evacuation of blood and for corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you put a leaden tube or guide on the penis, and have the patient urinate through it.
and when the foreskin is inflamed at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or it has been caused by a wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you cut away with the curved instrument, until the adhesions are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
and if this is a grievous thing to remove them, then it is necessary that you cut away with the spatula or some small instrument at the head of the penis and foreskin.
then wash it gently between the two, and put a soft linen cloth soaked in cold water on it, so that it does not become inflamed again.
Circumcision is not a breaking of continuity like other wounds; However, whenever we do this work of our own will and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcising their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen that the majority of masters and nobles who performed circumcisions around me were strong, and all young.
So it was that the skins parted because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts above and leaves the lower one. Then it is necessary to cover it up, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is done below the skin, the tip of the member is not ensured.
and at the cleansing of the ulcer by chance the iron escapes and the work is ruined, and many times such things happen that there is no need for cleansing and I have seen it.
Of the purification which is done with force to all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
When you press your hand, make it equal all around as much as possible. but that the thread be well stretched around the skin.
and the manner of the first operation is that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only making them wrap the thread around the penis as little as possible, and then let it hang in all ways you can.
then make it stay between your hands straight, and bind the force between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and draw it up so that the foreskin of the penis is retracted. then cleanse it well from the filth that is assembled there, then bind the foreskin with a double thread, then bind under one ligature and another.
then cleanse it well from the filth that is assembled there, then bind the foreskin with a double thread, then bind under one ligature and another. and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouch and the left index, and tie between the two ligaments, then lift the key above hastily and train the head of the rod; then let the blood flow a little bit by bit, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder I glue it with a yolk of cooked egg, tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh olive oil, and leave it on until the next day, and then treat another treatment until it is healed.
The forms of forces to purification are thus:
the two chisels should be held and biting, and the chisels also as great as the thumb in equal measure:
the error of purification is when the keys inside flow out through the incision;
Then you must extend it to your finger, as long as the swelling makes an abscess.
and file it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then grasp it with pincers, and then file.
And if they last three days, and what is below the swelling is inflamed, then leave it so that the abscess is appeased, and scrape it lightly.
and file as you can move, and keep away from the part of the shaft, lest it cause no harm.
Then cure the swelling with sudden wound powder, which we have said or treated in dealing with powders, and if you file too much beyond measure, and it goes above, then it will not harm.
then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to constriction of the kidney, or blood being frozen, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division;
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is swollen or inflamed at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and let them be placed on the back, and stretch his belly from above to the back, and strain the patient's urine as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the kidney above, whereby the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which has this form:
and let it be a thin, light-haired comb, like the feathers of a bird. and let the thread be one and a half palms long, and fine at the top.
And the manner of extracting urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie it at the top to a piece of wool or cotton, and push the top end of the thread into the syringe.
and cut off the excess of the wool and push it just to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and a little hen's egg white, and make the patient sit on the seat, and lift up his bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and stale water.
then gently place the syringe in the penis, so that it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the mouth.
Then insert the syringe before the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide that goes there is twisted.
Then pull out the thread bit by bit and little by little, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out further, and make the urine flow.
and reinsert the syringe until the bladder is empty, and soothe the patient.
When bleeding or blood comes into the bladder, or corruption is gathered there, and you see it distilling waters and medicines, then make all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
She is closed, and if there are three holes: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the hairs of the wick are trimmed so that the medicine does not overflow well without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and insert as needed;
and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the head of the key in the moisture, and draw on the one who is within;
If you draw out the moisture from the chest, and then quickly pull out the draining tube. If the moistures enter in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the subtle form of the enema by which one enemas the bladder:
And it's of silver or archaic, and the head is higher;
and below that is the breast or where the cord falls;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you use to enema the bladder, then tie it between two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pipe that contains this moisture over the fire;
Then put the head of the enema in the urethra, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has been released, so that the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a nail, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it in the instrument;
and do just as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
Of stone.
We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines;
and I have said the difference between a stoned kidney and rainwater, and all signs, and in which stone one should work with a file; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety.
and it opens up a hernia, and causes the patient's member to ache, and it pierces many times, and then swells. and many of these stones bring forth foundations;
and it is easier for children to recover until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in old men, and is in middle age, to those who are between youth and old age.
and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by cleansing, in order to draw out all the bad humors that are in the intestines. For it sometimes blocks any inquiry into the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and turn him over and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes falls from its height.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his buttocks, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward.
Then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then hurry now to cut on the stone.
And if it does not yield to the touch entirely, then moisten your two fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is feeble, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and complete. and push it to its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, then draw it up to the navel of the bladder.
Then press upon your finger, and push it out as far as you see where to cut.
And instruct the attendant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command him that he stretch forth with his right hand the testicles above, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where one makes the incision.
Then I insert the spatula-like instrument, because this is the form: And place it between what is between the crevices and the foundation, not in the middle but beside the left edge of the nave.
and be straight on the stone, and your two feet should be at the foundation, and be the shape of the traverse so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
in case the pressure makes the foot at the foundation jump away without effort;
and know that there are stones with angles and margins: so it is grinded to come out;
and if there are some that are worn down, resembling a gnat, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
To that therefore where it has angles and margins, make the shape larger;
and if it does not jump, then you must stretch on the pincers which are like a file at its head, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert below the ly instrument subtle curved at the head;
and if you cannot bend it thus, then widen the little hole and if the flesh is stripped away, then bind with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stones, then insert the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then remove it thoroughly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
And if she is very large, then it must be cut away, and make a bigger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out again on the other side where the wound cannot heal;
but always force it to be drawn or broken with pincers, until you draw it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, so anoint the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess. then bind the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, then arise the flesh with oil and water very well; then care for him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if hot abscesses come to the wound and ulcers, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this, which is known in such a way that without surging with urine: then pour out your bile into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and harm.
then wash the wound with water, vinegar, and salt, and aid him in all ways you know, until he is healed.
and it is necessary that all the works you do to cure him, that you bind his two hips together, and put the medicine in its place.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out. then cut it as I say, cutting many times, and excuse the cutting for this remedy. I have already proved it thus.
Take one iron rod in the shape and form, with three angled tips fitted into one socket:
then take a thread and bind it around the penis below the stone, so that it may not come down into the bladder;
then insert the forest (i.e. a thin stick or reed) into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the forest in your hand back and forth on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
then the urine will come shortly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. So is broken, and jumps forth with urine, and is healed the patient.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take a thread and place one end under the stone and the other above, then make the rod meet the stone between the two threads, then pull it forth, and free the ligament, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound. and heal him until he is sound.
of the stone of women
It often happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does so once, then the treatment is grievous, and it is prevented by three things:
one is that perchance the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands;
And the fourth manner is that the bone of the woman's arm is more prominent than the bone of the man's arm, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity requires this, you should take a woman well knowing, and find one, and if you do not find her, then don't bother to look for another subtle midwife;
and the present one is a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command regarding the incision of the arm; and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to strengthen her back or foundation and search for the bone;
and if it is true, then constrain it below its due and recommend to her that she must hold her due or with the patient and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder strongly.
and if it is true, then it should be moved gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh.
then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cord, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part. and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and be the first to cut at a small size;
and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and be the first to cut at a small size; then press the rule in the cut, if you feel the stone so deeply in the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that many types of stones are:
it is to know, small ones and great ones and rough and smooth, long ones and rounded, and those with reins.
if you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the wound bleeds, then put a bit of vitriol powder on it, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
then return to your work, until the stone is exhausted, and have tools that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work.
and if the wound bleeds, and it's from an artery that has been cut, then put powder on the spot and tie with tents and bandages, and do not start again until it has stopped bleeding, and let the stone be and do not try to remove it, lest the patient might die by chance. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling subsides, then return to your work until the stone is out.
Rhemaces are nothing other than a collection of moisture or white leprosy, which is under the key of the testicles, that contains the egg.
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of an egg, if one thinks that this is another egg; and it's the skin of the scrotum between the white syfac that we said;
and this does not happen unless one is not. And the generation of this ramification is from weakness that comes to the womb, and it spreads out that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the scrotum, and this moisture has many colors: or it's declining to yellowish, or it's without red, or black, or aquous white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white syfac that we said, then it is the abscess reopens, as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the scrotum, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper web, then it is the abscess reopens with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it's another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white scrotum, he will know it well;
therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test it with all the surrounding quarter-circles, because the form is as described before. Accordingly, what comes after the quadrants, judge what is inside.
And when we cut it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to their strength and the replenishment of their body.
then bind a cloth around his back, on something about a foot high, and put many cloths under it.
then sit on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on his right side, and stretch out the probe to one of the two groins of the scrotum.
then take the spatula left-handed, and cut the skin of the scrotum between it and the long one down to just below the foreskin, and make a straight incision cutting through the skin of the scrotum just up to the white scrotum, and scrape out subtly according to their strength.
Then pierce the syphac with water at the large perforation, and extract all the water, and then put in your probes, and stop up the syphac above.
and do not touch the key of the stones, but only the syphac; cut it out altogether or in pieces, namely the coat of his subtlety, lest if you do not cut it well sufficiently, the water will return;
and if the egg jumps out of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the syphac;
then assemble the two leaves of the key of the stones with a suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until he is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the haemorrhage of blood;
then strap the womb to all the suspensory, and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that they are two roots; then strap the other part similarly to how you did the first one evenly, and clean the wound, and put a moist compress in olive oil on the sore;
then strap the other part similarly to how you did the first one evenly, and clean the wound, and put a moist compress in olive oil on the sore; and put another moist compress in wine and oil on top, and place the two wombs on top, and place double cloths above, and tie it all up with a cord according to this shape:
Then take two cloths, and put woolen threads in the same manner and have them sewn together into the armhole of the undergarment, and one of the straps takes up the foundation to the back, and the other to the part of the shoulder;
and the other two heads on the two angels, and let everything be assembled into the restraint of the bowstring;
and sometimes medicine is applied to this cauterization in place of iron cutting, and it is that you take the cauterizing knife, subtly cut the skin around the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white fungus containing water becomes visible;
so take the cauter according to this form, and pierce that fungus once, and scrape it with this subtle hot cauter;
And cut it in all ways you can, until you have removed everything;
and be sure the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more safe; and be careful about the flowing of blood, and beware the works of cutting;
and if nothing makes you contrary, whether abscess or bleeding or other thing, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horribleness, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs we have said that the vein is good, make the patient sit on a light siege; then pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the spatula-like area, and put the perforation through the length of the body;
and make the wound large so that all the pus flows forth;
then put cotton on the wound and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow forth, then cure it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a feather or instrument used to treat dropsy in this way;
and enlarge the wound and know that the water comes back, and is assembled after six months or around, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
Know that in the cutting of this reed there are many fears and dispositions, why it seems to me that much is lost if one lets it go.
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come in the body, and especially in the groin; and it is through great chance.
It is to know by excessive acidity and bilious humor that spreads to the groin or from striking;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and it is a severe abscess;
and by chance there are grievous and pitted abscesses, of foul color, and sometimes come from a wound in the artery, or an inflamed vein.
When it is by a wound in the artery, it is known by the warmth of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not become necessary that you touch it.
He who is afflicted with an inflamed vein is known by its appearance at the expression of touching with the fingers, and can well make the incision on this resemblance, and on other similar things; and you should cut the key of the swelling, then lift it upwards, and pull out the white ligament, and release the suspensory from all parts of the swelling.
If the wound is already sore with new scars, then it is necessary that you treat the wound, and the swelling.
And if it is angry at the spleen or in those things that are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension and the swelling afterwards.
And if the birth of the joint is at the back, then it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a berry bud, with the softening of the skin, and the patient becomes very sick when it bursts.
And the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the one before it, and yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the ancient ones did.
You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of the skin down to your thighs, at all the vessels that are near the pubic area, and take hold of them, and stretch them out strongly.
Then cut the sponge trenchant wide at the crossing point near the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
Then fix an awl where there is the doubled thread, and tie it to the first location where the vein came out, and tie it again at the other end. Then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moles.
Then treat the wound as with others that begin in the bowel, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the kidneys;
For by this there is not harm coming, and if all the vessels come to view, then it is necessary to draw the kidneys in relation to all the vessels; So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and are unable to be helped.
The events of this rash are caused by the section that comes from the sweat gland, or the extension above the belly in the area of the groin, for which the intestines descend into one of the testicles;
and this rash is either from sweat or from extension above it, and there are two ways these things come about due to various causes:
or from percussion, or jump, or bellowing, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it's from sweat gland extension are that they appear gradually over a long time, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even down to the very bottom, because sweat gland pressure pushes out the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of syphilis, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing underneath the skin close by, and this is because of the issue from the intestine and the body being drained of the syphilis.
And sometimes the abscesses burst with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which one must take heed.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place with his hand inside the wound, if it can be inserted; Then be mindful on his neck. Between your hands, and lift the hips;
Then stretch the skin above, and cut all the skin of the scrotum to its length; Then push the leaves of the bandage into the wound in a way that you need to open it, and be such that the eye can come out;
Then scrape off the suppurated flesh that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the white suppurated flesh is exposed from all sides;
Then insert your two fingers into the space where the scrotum is, between the white suppurated flesh that is under the skin of the scrotum, and between the second suppurated flesh;
and then move your right hand into the skin of the scrotum, and lift the white suppurated flesh up to your left hand, and lift the testicle towards the belly; and instruct the attendant to stretch the cloth upwards, and loosen what is above the knot.
and seek at your hands if there is any inflamed or whitish swelling in the intestine; and if you find anything, bind it to the belly beneath.
then take a needle where there is thick thread made of nine threads, and sew it in the back part of the swelling which is after the skin of the scrotum; after the cutting, then trim the strings that appear from the sons, as long as there are four threads. then gather them together one upon another in the shape of a cross, and bind the swelling, which we have said is beneath the skin of the scrotum, with a strong band of two parts. then envelop the strings of the sons, and bind them strongly with two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an abscess should not come. and put the ligament above accordingly with the first long ligament two fingers' breadth below the key of the joints. and after that, all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut in the part that is below the skin of the joints, until the blood flows and the bowels move, as we have said before.
then apply moistened wool in oil to wounds, and put it on the joints, and apply the ligament that we have said. And sometimes the white syphilitic discharge that we have said is cauterized after incision, out of fear of blood dismemberment. For this often happens, and leave the ligament until it pulls itself loose;
and if it does not come loose, then raise warm water and put it on what we have said, until it comes loose;
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
of a fleshly hernia
In this recipe I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment by fire.
And the ancient ones say that it is made like the twig that is together with the vine, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cutting above and lightly below.
then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed.
and then cure it as we have said, until he is healed.
In some cases a rupture comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the swelling.
and do not let any of the intestines come out through the anus, and if they do come out, it is little, and repair them every hour.
and yet if he stays too long in this point, the wound or boil grows, until the intestines come out.
and this happens through the extension of the boil which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen, and opens.
and the cure is by fire cauterization, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is cured in this manner: and it is that the patient lies thus on his back between your hands, then cut the swelling of the rupture to the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
and then extract the pus that is below the skin and that follows, then take the raw flesh and place it on the apparent surface of the pus.
and press it into the deepest part of the belly, then cut the two apparent surfaces of the pus on the top of the raw flesh, and cut one and the other.
then extract the top of the raw flesh, and do not cut or stretch any other thing from the pus, as I have shown you in the cure of the gout of the intestines; Then the treatment by wound treatment.
Then the treatment by wound treatment. And when you cauterize the sons, so defile and cure the wound, until it is sound.
The syphilitic discharge is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more useful in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the intestines
The skins of some men are often softened in many places because the humors that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
and it is necessary when one wants to cure him that one makes the patient lie down on his back and scrapes off the softened skin from the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips at a seam, and if you see fit, sew first the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly.
Then scrape between the seams and treat the wound like others until it is healed, and let the thread go.
The punishment
Know that castrations are esteemed in our law, and therefore it would please me not to speak of them at all in this book.
and it is necessary only for two reasons:
When one is ill-treated in his own sight to answer what is asked when it is demanded of him, and in his own sight to heal.
and the other, because we often need to use correction on certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and goats and other beasts.
I say then that correction is done in two manners: or by attraction or by splitting.
In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the sinews are softened and relaxed. then taking them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Of the correction of size: it is necessary that you stretch the beast, and press the skin of the sinews to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike each joint one stroke, when you have well separated them;
and I leave no poultice of dry sulfur and the subtle sulfur which is on the vessels;
and this manner of correction is worse than that which is done by attraction, because at the attraction something remains from the testicles, and for this reason the beast desires lust;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermafrodite is according to two manners in men: one manner is that between the two testicles appears also like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.
And the other manner is in women, and has on the thumb also like a penis and two testicles.
And the care of man and woman is that you cover all the joined parts and treat them as other wounds;
in the second manner, men from whom urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, have no care.
A figuration is attached to the natural part on the skin, as long as it is too ugly to see. and some women have it just as big as a hand, and that's what it cures.
You should paint the excess of the figuration on your hand or nails, and trim it lightly;
and don't go too far in cutting, lest blood comes forth from it, and then the cure of another cure is needed until he is healed.
and to another mark that appears on the mouth of the marris, and it's filled in, and by chance it jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they called it "disease of the cow" in olden times. If you need to reset it, as we have said the remedy, and the treatment until it is healed.
It is errant if the natural condition of the woman is not perceived, or if the pustules are small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident by disease that has come to be;
and it is natural by birth, or an accident by disease that has come to be; or it is due to a joined bone, or subtle abscess, or swelling, and it happens in the middle, or in the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
and hindering conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this is through the look of the gallbladder.
If the swelling is nearby appearing, seek it at the shoulders or in the breast.
If it is a subtle abscess and it is close to two bones, then hasten and cut thus:
put your two middle fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
then bring the two bones into form, until the subtle abscess is reduced, and cover the swelling;
then take linen, moisten it in oil, and place it on the bone, and have the woman sit at home each day, so that it may not unite.
And if the fistula is hard and narrow, it is necessary that you cover it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the swelling is of flesh-born origin, then suspend it at the incision and cut.
and have the medicines that stay blood, such as, dragon's blood, frankincense, and together with many eggs.
then apply a bandage of linen wide, so that the wound cannot close.
and thus be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen.
then be cured by other treatments until you are healed.
And when new flesh comes in the margins, it is necessary to cover it according to this manner, unless it is enchanted abscesses. For an enchanted abscess that is in the margins, one should not touch with fire.
of hemorrhoids Varicose veins are openings of veins that have become accustomed to being without constraint, and when varicose veins are old they become ulcerous.
and we have said in the section what resembles them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure.
I diagnose that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not respond to sensation, except perhaps through medical treatment by fire.
Those who are at the mouth of the rectum, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then cauterize the ulcer with tongs, and cut into its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things.
then bind his feet to the appearance of an hour, then put it in cold water;
and if blood is discharged and comes forth, then make it sit in a decoction of sumac and green apple bark and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make an ointment to apply on his back.
And if it stays, it's good. If not, then make him wear poultices on the back and around the breasts so as not to hurt them;
then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess has healed, then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
and that which is called "albathir" is red and is similar to an ashen head, then it should be covered as I have said before with oil. and then continue with the treatment until they are healed.
Many kinds of abscess come to the marriage bed, such as syphilis and stony abscesses and herpes and boils and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in marriage, which is not like the abscesses that surround a boil.
and if you wish to know the operation of iron, observe whether the abscess is warm at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red so that you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce, but let it subside until the pain is alleviated.
and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or he leans on, and support himself with his back and bring his feet together away from the leg.
and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage.
Then follows the ball game towards the right side, and there are placed the instruments with which one works at the mouth of the marriage, from which afterwards comes the form.
and it is necessary that when you are about to place this instrument there, you mark the first line straight so as to know the depth of the marriage, so that what enters into the instrument does not go too deep and does not harm the patient. and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marriage with cloths, so that the instruments do not cause harm.
and it is necessary that he puts the rim of the instrument above and holds the instrument.
And when the abscess opens and one works it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, above the collarbone.
and when the bowstring is empty, so you should put damp cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil into the wound;
and put the cloth far from the wound at the bottom of the marsh, and put one above the marsh and on the clean linen dampened in water or cooked mallows;
then the healer after two days of ointment according to this, until it is healed;
and sometimes lift the marsh and the wound by washing with water and honey, and then with water or lily roots and long aristolochia cooked; then reapply the ointment.
And if the wound is placed in a sling, then it's necessary that you avoid cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary first at the bedside that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are such when you see the woman descending below and desiring to give birth.
Then the children hurry to get out. Then you know that this childishness is according to natural form, and the issues beneath his head, and the second joints with it.
and when you see these signs, then it is necessary to gently press his belly so that the child may come out soon.
for when he descends above his head, then the second joints are with him, and the excesses of his superfluities are purged by good purification.
and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For sometimes it comes above his feet, or above the chest or head, or in his hands, or above his belly, or somewhere else, and is converted by chance on his neck, and by other bad shapes.
So it is necessary for the ball to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how one should help him.
If the child comes out on its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth in travail, and the virtues of it are weak, then make it sit on a stool, or women hold it.
and its natural excretion of oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then pour the bail between its two navel strings, which is the form. and split the afterbirth, and cut to his navel string until the moisture that is inside comes forth.
and paint the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purgative the woman with fenugreek mixed with sesame oil.
then make her press and strain with condensation, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour. so now the child is still.
And if the two hands are too far apart, then you must bring them together gradually little by little; and if they cannot enter, then the woman should sit on the siege, and lift her feet up high; then remove the siege from the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not fall while standing;
and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, then cut open the hands with the knife that is placed beforehand, and extract the child, and bring it back into place;
from the birth of the child on his feet When the child comes out onto its feet, then it is necessary to raise it up high; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
then take the foot and stretch it little by little.
Can he jump as far as his thighs, then command her to bend down, and make her stretch out with condishion; If it jumps away, then may God will.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it slowly and carefully until it is according to the natural figure. For then it will be easy.
And if it doesn't come away as we have seen, then take mastic of the elder, and oil of sassafras, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put it on the natural of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in cold water down to below the ribs.
and when she is moistened below, put a collyrium of myrrh on it, and put it underneath, and let her have an hour. then make her sit on the stool, then make her cough and strain her mouth and nose, and lightly palpate her belly, for the child now jumps.
of the issue of the child from its knees When the child comes in this form, I put it into its mother's hands little by little. Then be sure on his neck, and the feet hang down below, and be supported above the bed; and fold his hands little by little, and then take hold of the hands above the belly, and lift away the pillows below, until it is aligned down; and if the child does not cry out, take his feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in; and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold until the child comes out.
of the issue of the child which comes out with one hand holding onto something. it is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then have the woman get up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and lift away her legs well;
Then administer the muscle-like thing which I have counted.
and if it does not give birth, then make her sit on the siege, and then study to bring back the hand; and shape it according to its natural figure, and make it protrude, and command her to grasp as the child emerges forward.
of the issue of the child from its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary that the nurse hold his hand, then turn him a little bit by little bit, and gently ease him;
and when he is equal, then put on the muscle-like thing of aloes and oil, as we have said, and command her to move slowly.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on the siege, and command her to grasp; and make it protrude. of the same manner for all the afterbirth.
of the same manner for all the afterbirth. When he comes forth in this way to the entire joint, then cut the joint at your fingernail, until the moisture is drained.
and if the child bites its face and neck, so that the skin breaks open and it is not retained, and the child will die;
then put the child inside until you have placed him as it is fitting, and instruct the woman to take hold of him sometimes:
of the issue of twins Know that triplets are often born, and sometimes four or more. and this is not an unusual thing, nor does it happen rarely. Twins are an unusual thing, and they do not live if only two can be named;
Twins are an unusual thing, and they do not live if only two can be named; I know that they are multiplied, and they are divided by the placenta which divides them, which is attached to the womb;
and sometimes they issue naturally just like one from above, as we have said.
And if they are grievous, then follow the cure as we have said, and be subtle in the treatment, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do thus as it is worth for one's salvation. of many children
There are no more than fifteen days formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh month, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the doctor knows everything about this, for similar things may happen to him. and do according to what is necessary.
of a dead child
When you cure the woman after a stillborn child or miscarriage, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are compelled to work by hand; so that you know whether the woman is of good virtue, and has no accident or is not afraid of death;
If it is necessary that the woman be seated on her back, and have her feet inclined downward, and her legs lifted.
and the midwife should apply a thread of two parts to the mother's bed, or she is tied to the bed so that she will not be disturbed in giving birth to the child.
then moisten the mother's mouth with oily liquid made from aloes and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and medicinal liquids.
then put them into the mother lightly, then have her lift up or push out the afterbirth that is conducive to this, and take care that the child descends onto its head.
if the afterbirth comes out into her eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs, and if it descends on its feet, then set it or push it away from the sides.
and it is necessary that he hold the ligature in his right hand, and put the bandage between the fingers of his left hand, and tie all his hand lightly, and place the ligature in any of those places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then place it opposite another ligature, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that there may be movement, and the ligatures are tight enough to hold the movement, as is its form:
And if a part remains, then anoint the bail with some oil, and tie it in that part, and draw the other part;
and if there is none left, then place this ligature or more above, and do so until it all comes out altogether.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the constriction, so you must envelop it with a cloth, until it becomes entirely. Then wrap the bandage around the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and thus you must do in the other hand, and with both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is strained in the birth, or it has a sharp edge assembled, so you must push the spatula-shaped spine between your two fingers, and make the head and extract the water. or you should cut it with the instrument which is called "almidach", because the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus do the same if the child has a great natural head.
and then pull the bones apart with pincers, and if the head jumps out and it strains at the forceps, so that they are split, until the liquids which are in the issue come forth.
and if she cannot come out, so cut her apart into sections as you can.
and if he is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole so that the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is light.
And if he is strangled in the belly or at the chest, then it is necessary that you loosen him from the wrapping cloth on your hand. and make a cut in the belly or the chest, until the moisture which is there flows out.
and if the other limb is pulled off and the head remains, then put the bail's hand into the farthest part of the wound, and pull it to the mouth of the wound. then put in one or two fingers and pull him forth.
and if the mouth of the wound is constricted because of hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to struggle, but rather prepare things moist and greasy. and the plasterer should prepare ointments, and six in softening and moistening waters.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then plaster as we have said in a living child;
and if one cannot, then take it apart piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, then plaster as we have said in abscesses that come to the swelling;
and if there comes forth blood flowing, it should be put into water restraining it, and another plaster applied.
And I saw a woman whose womb had contained a dead child, then she consulted with another about that one, and rejected the dead one. After a long time, an abscess came forth in her mouth, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to cause great turmoil.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the wound.
I applied a plaster with strong traction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I was very surprised, because the womb has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wish the wound, and in bringing together several bones, until the woman was in a better condition; and the woman stayed thus for a long time, and then occasionally came forth a little pus from the wound;
and I do not recall this chapter being opened except for this reason that when the master finds an unusual thing he knows how to put it right.
Next comes the shape of the pressure point, by which one reads the books;
and at two turns on both sides of both shoulder joints. However, the combs should be more subtle than the restricting one, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the fist should be about two hands wide, and the edge of the trees one palm and a half long; and between the two joints there should be about half a palm or a little more of space;
and these two joints are joined in the mouth of the fist to open when one turns the two combs.
Another form, made more subtle and light-like, should be fashioned from boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of pincers; and have two notches, just like you see, one palm long and two inches wide;
and when you see the opening of the uterus at all instruments, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet spread apart and her legs open wide, then insert the two notches together into the uterus, and hold the head of the instrument under between her hips; then work your hand on the instrument, just like you have done with pincers evenly, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the uterus, until the patient makes it as she wishes.
These instruments are all mounted and have multiple shapes; and when the mirrors are prepared, then the work is all the more hasty and higher for men due to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, then you must instruct the patient to retain her urine and then have it stirred with conditions, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she does so because of that, well it is.
If not, then I take a poultice, and make a patch or covering, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cascioline, and centaury; all these herbs or some of them being cooked or steeped in water above the fire;
then place a cloth or patch on the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the womb, and tighten it so that the fumes come inside the womb;
Then let it be estranged, as we have said. If the secondine heats up quickly.
And if it remains after this cure and is not fully healed, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or musk mallow of hawthorn, and then apply it in its natural state, and ask for the second time. and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little correctly, so that the hairs do not hinder the extraction.
but make it move slightly to the right and left, and then draw it. and so it will come and become disarranged.
And if the mouth of the hair is too narrow, we have said the treatment for estrangement and the fumigation of herbs;
and if she does not follow all that we have said, then be careful not to make a mistake while drawing.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marriage, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then anoint with ointment four-pharmacologist. if it will permit and restore, and comes forth;
but nevertheless, when she permits this, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient. So it is necessary then to perform suitable fumigations for that:
no ancient has proven the effectiveness of fumigation with dandelion and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the secondine is this:
And it seems like a chain, and one places the head subtly in its natural state, and the large joints above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the lice until it is wasted, and then start another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by subtle signs. So then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that subtle sign at its due time, and not let it be pierced by sharp instruments, and guard the position so she does not touch it.
Then apply a moist linen cloth in vinegar and oil, then treatment with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, put a cord of flax into the wound and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to chambers.
And sometimes this stopping occurs suddenly in a wound or abscess; So then it is necessary to cover that sudden swelling: if it be cured, as we have said about the knot of flax.
Fistulas that come from below the foundation are swelling, and grow larger than those that come from above the foundation or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
and when that swelling is old, so it works, and with more moisture awakens white or subtle pus, and sometimes these abscesses persist;
and are accompanied by this, that it either empties out or vents itself when the patient makes an evacuation, and possibly jumps into one's face.
And if these abscesses penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and reach just to the junction of the buttocks, and just not the knee.
And thus one knows that the abscess persists at the fundament, and does not persist: and is that you push your index finger or fundament, and push in a subtle needle of iron or steel into the abscess when there is no twistiness.
And if it has twistiness, then push in a subtle awl or horsehair, until you feel the awl or hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and he does not come with a perforation or ejection of wind or pus, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate. if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is pierced all the way to the bladder or the urethral canal, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced just to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes right up to its place; if there is no twisting and the cause of the pain surrounds it, then it goes to the back, and no medicine or poultice by anointing is worth;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In one that is not Persian and not old, there is hope of recovery by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
and let the patient's legs come down to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his belly; then pitch a tent of clay or if there is twistiness, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you should place your two fingers there, if then the tent has pierced.
and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh or fat, then know that it is purulent; if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One says that some can indeed be healed, but this happens rarely;
and the help one gives is to cauterize the subtlety of the abscess according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before; and make the poultice hot in the fistula, until it comes to the foundation. and do this twice or three times, until you know that these charred fragments are burnt, which are similar to a bird's feather.
and then apply oil from moist tents in butter, until that charred fragment comes out, then apply ointment anointing the wound and closing it.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
If this, otherwise it cannot be healed;
and if the tent goes in and does not pierce all the way to the doot which is at the foundation, and there is a dense covering of char or of flesh between your skin and the tent, and you see the fistula on the surface that closes the covering of gold. so cut at the beginning of the fistula, and put afterwards before the tent, and then apply the cauterization after, until it comes to the top of the tent. and will be freed the tent, and falls;
then define those deformed nails that seem like a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
And if the blood increases, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
For the fire cauterization brings together two things: that is to say, the burning of these deformed nails, and the drying up of blood and the evaporation of moisture;
then treat the wet tents with butter or bruised herbs, until the pus flows out, and let the burned nails fall into the pus;
then cure the wound of the swarming sores that form hard flesh, and are the dried medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
And if the fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then insert your finger into the fundament and feel around.
If you feel the tent and between two is the cloth or the syphac or nails, where it is close to bursting, except there are fires that go by faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
You cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bone, or if you can, you put tents and care for it as before.
And don't go too far in depth, lest you cut the tenant who holds the foundation, and the evacuations will come by chance without intention. Then care for it as we have said;
Then care for it as we have said; By chance if it is sound, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut near the foundation, by tent or by another appointed instrument. Then cleanse that flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can. Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation:
Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And some times fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you set up the tent in the fistula, and it is on the outer side of the foundation below the skin above, so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form: And I put one twisted thread into two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is torn in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that perforation, so that you set your tent or foundation;
and draw the head of the thread, and tie together the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for one day or two;
and restrain it occasionally, until the threads have worked their way through what is between them, and separate;
then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, except if it is too deep. For it is not necessary to cut too far down and then cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spaticular spine from which one makes a fistula is very rough, one side and jagged; and on the other side not, because of which it does not cut at all that which one should not cut at all, as you see here:
Dislocations are according to two manners: where they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in court blood comes, and there is one or multiple, and they go outside the foundation and to the top of the foundation;
but those that are outside have little moisture, and in court or a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
and the cure for those who have them within the foundation is that you instruct the patient to stretch and lie down in chambers until the foundations come out, and then the sons appear; so hasten, and take it with pincers, or hold it to your nail, then cut into its roots;
and if the ligaments cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camlet; and strain them to your fingers, then chop, and powder on some hot powders that are in place of cauterize; or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cauterize, then cure other wounds until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot come out, then purgative him with a biting and harsh purge to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it may come out openly; when the patient becomes inflamed, and if the thread is pulled too far from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
when the patient becomes inflamed, and if the thread is pulled too far from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and that you grasp them with your finger or with pincers, and chop, then cure as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he fears the incision by iron. It is necessary that you bring the stitching in this manner:
It is necessary that you bring the stitching in this manner: Take I twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, then draw the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, so that it is of width.
and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one for correcting the excess of blood.
then place a damp cloth soaked in oil or cerot on the foundation, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let him be until he has purged, and when they are purged, so treat him with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
of the dryness of the fiend or foundation Many times it happens that dryness of the intestines occurs, and due to constriction of nature, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help. It is necessary that you cut at the tip of a spatula or with your fingernail the scab above, which does not let it moisten. then care for him as long as he is sick as necessary;
and if he cannot recover, then resurface the sore even stronger than before until he heals a little and is purged; then care for him as long as he is healed.
of the shivering A fungus is a small imperfection located outside the body and goes very deep;
and sometimes it freezes through to the bone, and one feels it as much as dead of numbness, and comes throughout the body, and more in the arms than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a goose quill or a strong peacock feather and place it on the numbness, until the circles purple the numbness entirely. then turn your hand all around the quill until you cover entirely the numbness, and put it deep inside, and draw out the numbness from its roots.
And if you see, then do this with a file of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and drawing above. not to pierce, but rather to hold firm at two, and to press.
And if you see, then cauterize the tremor, as it is written before or in this chapter of cauterization.
One never makes a poultice with silver or archaut, or melted tin or maillet;
and one never makes any of these small and great instruments, according to the method by which they are prepared. Those then which are used in the care of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Those then which are used in the care of children and those who are weak and painful are small. The form of a purgative small and great is thus broad or the belly is bound in this manner:
and if there is a deviation or the bowels are tied, as you see, and the head inside pierced;
and it has two holes on one side and one on the other.
and the bowels are tied with medicines from a deer's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around by small holes, and has between each hole one span of distance, then pour in these holes one strong thread twisted in X or eight times around, and assemble the belly as if it were a kid. and when the medicine is inside, bind it to the instrument with a strong thread, then cleanse.
and this is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg white or something similar, then fill it lightly. then the assistants should squeeze it together with both hands as long as it is fully full, then extract the clyster, and lift the patient's legs up high, and if the medicine wants to come out, so hold on as long as possible. and if he sleeps all night again, it is a greater aid.
And if you purge in a disease of windiness of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then let the clyster be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the subtle form of the cystic swelling above which the skin is strained:
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds;
or we will say the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or with a lance or bow or arrow, or similar things;
or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or back, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head that are simple, because the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from striking with stone or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you are lightly doubting of hot aposteme: If he makes it so soon heal from the head wound itself if it comes out with blood from the wound, and the wound is healed on the opposite side of the injured part.
and instruct the patient to drink full of wine and eat big meats.
And if he does not want to heal, then his meat should be thinned out and he should not drink wine or eat any flesh.
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes to it, a moist cloth soaked only in rose oil or in wine vinegar.
and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it is fresh and still has all its blood, and it is not affected by air or moisture, which I will say more about shortly.
and if the ulcer has been moved by fire, then put some ointments on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, so bring them together by suturing, as I will say about belly wounds, with suturing.
If the wound is discovered to be in the bone, and penetrates, and holds only by a little, then cut it. Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like pigeons, and similar things.
And if you find rotten flesh and it's not touching the bone, then cut off all the rottenness, and empty it out, then heal it.
and if he has an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stanched by medicine, then tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you put this powder that sets it so as the fire has changed it.
And the manner of this powder is: take a part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; take three parts of living coal, and powder it subtly, and fill the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood;
and then tie it well, and let it stay untied, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one does not do this with coal alone, except when one has no incense nor dragon's blood, but only when the fire has moved the wound.
And if the fire has changed the wound, indeed so it is, then do not put this powder on it;
but put some digestive ointments or polts made of wheat flour, water and honey on it, until it flows freely; Then continue with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle forceps.
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound on the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or an artery are cut.
If it is a hernia, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the hernia and makes it retreat. and put nothing cold on the wound, because the substance of hernia is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soft, like chalk washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and wash the wound also in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist anointings.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind with bandages, then treat until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she is bald and full of pus, then pierce or cut lower down.
and if the artery is severed, and blood flows forth, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize as necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is severed, or the trachea, and the conduit is preserved, because the flesh will go forth, then cut the throat above the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it to its natural shape. and then restrain it properly, and let it be for some days, then cure it with ointments as long as it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it out. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all you can, and those that you cannot remove, let them remain until the wound is purged, and the issue is opened and loose.
and if the wound is fresh, powder on powder as I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it's a wound from an arrow or sword, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are any signs of festering that the patient should be alarmed about. know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it's not deep and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't put any powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it up by the blood that doesn't flow forth, but rather let it flow back to the heart, and kill the patient. but I apply an attracting unguent, and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have unguent, put old cotton in the wound to absorb any moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if there is no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart nor unnatural convulsions; and when you see good signs, then know that the wound is saved. then cure it with poultices and other treatments, until he is healed;
and if it cannot heal or produce pus, then know that there is a fistula;
if the cure is done as one should. And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or on the arm or back, then cure that which is in front. if it is large, by suturing;
and if it is small, by powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and treat the parts if they are separated. and if they are not cleansed, then let the wound rot, so it will ease the extractions.
and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
of the great wound sometimes the intestines or the membranes of the intestines burst, which causes the introduction of pus.
and the suturing is more troublesome, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one, therefore one should insert the intestines gradually, rather than inserting them suddenly.
because the intestines swell at once when they feel cold, and so they enter more gradually, and therefore it is better to move the medium wound, because one should return the intestine to its place as with other two.
And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common forms occur in the hernia of the belly, and the wound of another part of the body and two other proper forms are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more proper with the hernia of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine comes out, and a gentle thing is needed to restore it, this is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed by cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: soak an esponge or cloth in lukewarm water only, or you boil it in water with squinat and cypress and spike, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed.
and at times this wine restrains, and is necessary to remove the swelling so that it may be deflated.
And when you see the swelling departing, then wash the intestine with water or broth and boil well, for by this means the entrance to the wound is prepared for little things.
and if it cannot enter, then make the wound a little larger with the instrument with which one cuts off hemorrhoids.
and the first treatment is to cut away excess skin, so that no one should cut without great necessity there being.
and this is the instrument for cutting:
if you cut inside the curve and do not remove it, and see where the shape is. And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps forth, set it back in its natural form to its proper place if you have the power, for this is a movement.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head. et s’elle est in the part below the belly so sets the head and breast higher than the parts below and also if there is a wound of the belly in one of the two parts so sets one’s attention on what the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is fitting to remember what I say about great wounds and injuries.
Small wounds apply what is familiar to you, then take with your hands the poor minister who holds all the wound in his hand and close the lips;
and it is the common manner of stitching, and that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound about two fingers' breadth, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread. and pierce the two keys of the skin with the two keys of the slipper, which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and tie together the two heads of the slipper fourfold.
Then the strain of a double thread is wrapped around the needle's point on both sides, then the two edges of the wound are brought together properly, and then leave a gap of about two fingers' breadth, and put in another needle.
Then tie the thread of the cloth in the same way you did the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to what need you have of needles, until all the wound is restrained.
and be the needles of suitable size, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well. therefore it is necessary that they be of a suitable size;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing.
and then bind the heads of the needles so they do not bother the patient at night; and I put tents or cloths on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and let them stay until the wound is healed.
and this manner of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it only requires one or two needles.
The second sewing is common, and it is that you join the two heads of the leather and the two heads of the silk together with a needle where there is a strong middle thread.
and when you have pierced all four heads together, then pull the needle through at the part where you started, in the way that one sews fabrics.
and put a space between each stitching, about the thickness of a minor coin;
this stitching is for men, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width large, and the intestines were torn two palms' widths long, and the wound was inside the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been gone for 24 hours, and the wound was closed 15 days later, and I cared for it, and it healed.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and did not heal him with oil, for I was in the region where one could not find it, nor any medicine; and placed gauze over the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle and insert it from outside into the part that is inside.
when it has pierced the correct point in a straight line, then pull out the end of the siphon or cutting or where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce on the other side into the inside part up to the outside.
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier makes pelts, and that you leave once the siphon from one side and then take it up again on the other, until the stitching is entirely completed.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly, is such that some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the ends to the other end, in this way:
thread an awl or needle nearby, and make a hole only in that place, and leave the two ends of the suture. then turn the awl, and make it pierce from the outside to the inside part, up to the two ends of the suture.
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside to the inside part, in two other holes of the needle that are on the opposite side.
and this is the second manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen says this word, and others testify to it, so one should sew the belly with two needles, or there be thread in each.
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and know that when the rupture is near the belly, then the incision is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the heat has changed it, then you should return to the intestine and the flesh.
then put powder in jamming charcoal, and if the heat has changed it, then put on some ointment that is at hand, until the wound closes. and stitch the thread, and sew up the stitches, and the gauze. then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
and if you don't have medicine, put this on, as soon as it starts to push out pus, old rags, and move it twice a day until it is clean.
For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not make a commonwealth to principal members, then it is necessary that you mix a little bit of lanolin in temperate heat oil or in rose oil, and put it around the wounds, and underneath the armpits;
and if it feels pain or purging in the bowels, and many times happens, then cleanse with black vinegar, and likewise if the purging comes just to the intestine;
and probe within, and know that when it is the large intestine, then it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the weakness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to those of natures.
And if the suture jumps out of the wound, then put it back in place just as the intestine is repaired; while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turned green or black, then you must bind the place that is black so that no blood comes from there, because there are veins and arteries.
then tie what is between the ligature, and place the two knots below the wound until it is full of blood so that the extraction may be eased when the sutures fall out, and the wound will heal.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that a man was wounded in the stomach by a spear.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and in it there was discharge and flatulence.
I will the patient according to what I can, and did not cease to subtlety until he was cured, and the limbs were set.
And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient might have harm in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in this manner: take fresh figs, then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the fig has opened the mouth, place it above the two lips so that it straitens its mouth above;
and then tie the head, and it will remain so that he cannot untie it, then put another fig after in this manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered; and dress the wound.
That intestine is adhered to the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
Take the end of this intestine thread that is quite clean-shaven, and then bind it to the end of this thin linen thread, twist them together, and then push the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it in a knot.
and this manner of stitching is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the groin's intestines, then there is no remedy nor salvation, except subtlety.
of fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it begins to fester, is universally called a "fistula", and similarly when it breaks open and flows.
And a fistula is according to the natural nodation which is hard and white, or where one does not feel pain, and it is also curved like the feather of a bird.
and sometimes with a clear bow, and other times dense; sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no scar, it is due to one of the nine causes: that is to know, by the slightness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard scarring inside and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much blood; or the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and is drained by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicine in the section.
or it is necessary that I should make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the syphilitic, or from the intestine, or from the bladder, or from some of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and if it occurs in the property of the principal member, and similar places.
And all the fistulas that are like this are of grievous sanitation, and there is nothing but hard labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come just to the place I said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to understand it, then take a tent of iron or earth, if the fistula is straight, so that you seek it;
and if the fistula is twisted, then seek out a subtle punch, for the punch bends inwards around the twist.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tents, then cleanse it by one of the openings, for the moisture is so short from one opening to another, and purifies.
then ask the patient's consent to let blood at your discretion, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and be careful not to probe too deeply, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the corrupted flesh and the rotten humors that are inside.
and then the cure should be continued until it is healed; and if the fistula is well opened in its proper place, you should fill it as full as possible with moist compresses in medicinal poultice, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom.
and then you put on plasters in a good manner to healthy flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this means, then you should cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then you should cut.
If vein or nerve does not grieve or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then you should clean it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things on healthy flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not cleansed, and returns to its previous state as before, know that you are not yet fully healed:
if you uncover and search until you reach the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus cleansed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep-rooted, so you cannot reach it; if there is no other remedy than to rely on nature alone;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can draw it out with pincers, then draw it out with an instrument suitable for that purpose, and if there are many bones, then draw them all out, leaving none of them;
and if moisture hinders you, and there is no mistake or fear, then cut and remove the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put a poultice on the wound that brings forth pus, and let it remain until the flesh is purulent around the bones, and then they will have more easily;
and if it is a great bone, such as the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackened flesh is removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is great part of the corrupted flesh and comes just to the bone; so it is necessary to scrape and cover all up to the corrosion, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matters came out at the leg and became inflamed with a great abscess, and he had no reason to stop until it opened;
but the physician through their foolishness worked so much on the abscess that it opened, and there was a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and many ulcers came that all burst forth with pus and moisture from the body.
and many physicians had treated him for two years, and there was no benefit in the art of healing, until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the ulcers with great corruption. and the skin of the young person became red and had a citrine color.
I set up a tent in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one was coming against another from all parts of the leg.
So I hastened and cut into one of the ulcers until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came as far as the bone inside.
I saw what appeared to be the corrupted bone and thought there was no other corruption except for that which I removed.
and I began to heal the wound with medicines over a long time, and could not close it.
and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and cleaned it, and then removed it, and was hesitant to close the joint. but I could not until I covered about a palm of the bone with flesh, and made it whole to its entirety, then I healed it with medicines. and it was healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to continue the treatment except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. Because of the blood evacuation, it often happened that he was cured entirely, and instead of the bone, a hard skin grew out, and he had good condition and no harm or contrary to anything at all, neither in going nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be set like this: take a linen, and strain it to the top of the exposed bone, and command someone to stretch it upwards; et place another thread of linen larger than the first one, and tie it above the flesh that is below the bone, and let it be so that you remove the corrupt flesh underneath, and uncover the flesh above the joint where you see fat, lest it injure the flesh;
and place a tison or a table beneath the bone in order to cover up the corrupt flesh;
and it is necessary to uncover and see as much of the corruption as one can see and feel, and uncover again another time.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
then place a tison beneath, and then uncover from one part to the other the corruption, and be sure of the length of the corruption as we have said;
and if corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and be on the other side where it contains bone.
and if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there being no other angle to cut from.
and if corruption is in the finger of the hand, or in the toe, it is very strong that thing, but anyway you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you. and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
and know that the incisors and the sutures for cutting these bones are many, according to the structure of the bones and their appearance, size, subtlety, grandeur, smallness, and hardness. and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument according to the appearance of the work.
and knows that the work will show you the instrument with which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; if you think about the instrument with which you have need, according to what it is fitting.
The shoulder can be dislocated either from within or from without.
and when you have medicine to correct this corruption by the treatment of medicines, and it does not profit, then it is fitting to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes either by death or by the greater malice, which is more grievous, due to the failure of the limb.
and the signs are that the member becomes black, so it seems to be burned by fire, and afterwards it appears again, then this corruption of member spreads from member to member, and takes over the entire body.
If you hasten the cupping, and if it is due to the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the knee, then cup it, and do not give him space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cup at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then cup to the shoulder;
and if it passes the shoulder, it is a death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
and so it does when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cup after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cup the whole foot; and if it rises to the leg, then strike at the joint of the knee.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
and the manner of striking or soothing the member is that you bind it above and below, stretching out one minister's line downward and another line upward, and you leave the flesh between the two lines to be cut one spatula width wide, until the bone is uncovered.
then strike or soothe, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the soothing does not touch the healthy part, and another lesion and abscess will ensue.
And if bleeding comes from the wound when you work, then cauterize it quickly, or put some restraining powders on top.
then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it is sound.
and I will tell you what happened to him at home in his bed:
he had a burn that seemed like fire-burning, and that corrosion came first to his heel of the foot, so it consumed all the foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed;
and long after that the corruption returned to the tip of his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him certain things that were reperfusing after the purification of the body, but he could not stop the corrupting;
and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I would not, for I had hope of reperfusing the matter; and I also doubted whether if he cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtues of the human body were weak;
and he was desperate all over, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and he healed;
and I did not tell this story except for the reason that one makes another tale when it is necessary.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a swollen part and stays so long that it gathers a great collection of pus; and then they burst and pierce, and the pus jumps out, and the swollen part remains empty, just like empty vessels; and the skin above is just as subtle as delicate draperies, and does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so elongated that it comes to the bone almost by front, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure is that you scrape away all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just as one scrapes away curtains; and is not hurt because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin is hurt, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is full of flesh, then heal it with a poultice thus:
look if the breast is great, and the lump that is in it has a foul smell, then heal it with Egyptian medicine made thus: Take oil of aloe, and oil, and litharge, equal parts, and put it to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take this mixture according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and make a poultice on the chest, and hold the perforation. and let the medicine stay for two hours, then strain it expecting;
do this many times, until the breast is cleared, and the pus has been removed.
and at no time is it clisterized with ash water when this medicine is not present, and you should take ashes from the wood of the vine, pour water on them, then strain it, and apply it to the breast until you know that the breast is well cleared.
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then apply water and honey or where he has a little bit of litharge mixed in. You mix honey with wine sweetened, that the honey has the property to purify and wash, and the wine makes the blood fresh.
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the skin is well purified, then mix with what brings forth flesh in it, and take definitive poultice, made with rose oil and wine.
You apply it with some medications and ointments, whose properties I have said or treat the ointments.
and if the pustule of the skin is small, and the plug of the poultice cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with a needle, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or Basilican ointment until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too large, so that it cuts and leaves only enough space for the poultice to enter, and if the pustule that drains pus is above, then cut or lower it down to its level.
And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, then prepare in such a way that the bowels run to the lowest place they can reach; since the bowels are in harmony, do not let decay set in and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, then prepare in such a way. so that the bowels flow gently downwards, and do not leave anything behind from the bowels;
so that the bowels flow gently downwards, and do not leave anything behind from the bowels; and take consolidative medications to put a seal on the wound, and place it on the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cover the area with force in the wound, as it is no longer as wide as the first one; then anoint it gently with oil on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound of the breast to ease the bowels, and do not remove the great cloth elsewhere except after several days once.
and the one who is on the breast ulcer, often removes it to remove the boil, and knows what comes from the boil, whether it is venom or pus or enough or not digested or undigested;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that bursts forth on the breast ulcer, then know that the breast is already hardened, and approaching the state of health;
and then loosen it in the morning or on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, so change another dressing and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, don't despair at all of one's health, for good health is near.
For there are people who take too long to clean their wounds with honey, and those who do the opposite;
and if the undigested boil bursts forth from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not hardened;
et if the skin is tardy in healing and is far away, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as ointment defines it, for there is great part of vitriol, and this is the final medicine;
take defined ointment and mix it with rose oil and equal parts of old wine in substance;
then boil it and apply it;
and make honey cooked and thickened, when defined ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire;
and then apply it to the cloth, and stretch it over the skin, and sometimes administer it to an Aristologist for a long time, and roots of lily, which is also like fine wheat flour and saffron; and in use of simple or composite: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey I said, and use;
and if the wound is inflamed and is not healed by this remedy, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply and makes an impression on the bone, or hardens the limbs, or tightens the ligaments; if the wound is a fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other parts;
and when it is neglected and not attended to, then the abscess becomes gangrenous and runs and pours pus so long as it can run to the root of the nail, and by chance may even drain entirely;
and comes the corrosion all the way to the bone, so long as it brings stinky pain, and is the shoulder joint wide, and is the color flush.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the surplus flesh remaining from the boil, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy.
and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick, and bleed, then it is necessary that you place the rod underneath the nail that pricks the flesh, and put it above, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicinal and corrosive substances in order to remove all. then treat with ointments until he is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it away, and take out the pus, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, he cannot heal.
and if you see the joint corrupting, then cut it away as was said before, and treat until he is healed.
and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you should heal it first.
then cut the gouty lump above with a diagonal cut, and be careful that the cut does not come all the way to the skin below the lump, for the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The joints that occur in the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is a bone or it has bones, and occasionally one is born at the root of the joint, or birth is in some knuckles of the fingers.
He who is born in any part of the night from the shoulder does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the shoulder, by chance moves.
the cut of one who is fat is light, in that way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is hard to cure: it holds up from being cut.
In one who is born or will be at the back part of the body, it is necessary that you scrape off first the fat around to the bone, then scrape the bone to a suitable thread for this, and then cure it until it is healed.
The kind of wound that comes together by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
You must cover this wound so that it can repair itself according to its natural forms. Then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the skin is joined, as it should be.
If a wound comes to any of its joints with the palm, then bind that wound as it is necessary.
Veins are great swelled and inflamed, full of melancholic excesses, which come from many members of the body;
and it occurs more in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
It is necessary then that you minister to him sometimes purging of gall, and then salve from the basilica.
The iron cure is according to two manners: one is where you cauterize, and wipe away the black blood; and the other manner is that you open a vein, and let it bleed completely.
The skin sores are according to this manner: The first sign is a hot water swelling in the leg very strongly, until the gross blood becomes subtletized, then strain the patient's leg from above the hip down to the part below the knee.
Then cut the vein in one place or two places or three, with a wide incision, then lift and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure without harm.
and then bind it, and instruct him to eat flesh food allowing black bile.
and recommence the evacuation and purging when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
The remedies for this are according to this manner: Raise the patient's leg if it has many hairs, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and fill the veins.
And if you do not have a bath, then warm it by the fire, and then cut into the vein at the long part of the thigh or in the lower part below the knee.
then cut open the skin at the incision, and scrape away the vein from each side, until it appears as it should when one feels it.
and then you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord.
then bind the thread below, until it is raised from the skin, and then incline it to the incision lightly, and then cut in another place above three fingers.
then scrape away the skin above the vein until it appears, and then lift it to the thread, just as you did, and incline it to another incision, just as you did first.
Then cut another size, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the joint of the foot, then train and lift just to the second size.
Then strain it from size to size, until it is all free, then cut.
And if you cannot strain and lift it, then put a needle on all the strong thread, and tie and train it, and put underneath the rail, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out. And guard that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then it cannot be strained or lifted, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have strained it all, then put a damp cloth of linen on the site of the wound in vinegar and oil rosated. and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and curved together, and it is not straight, as we have said, so you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it. and treat it as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron used to open the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it opens the vein.
and is of great curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is inserted into legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on the earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may be found in another part than legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from beneath the skin, as it does inside the body of serpents and worms, inserted between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the skin changes, and the vein begins to flow forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth one and a half feet long up to two and a half feet, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it comes undone at the back, so wrap it around the cloth again, and tie.
and if it is too long, so cut a part off, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is entirely removed. for if you cut it, so it will enter into the flesh, and bring about an abscess and corruption in that place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the top, and no part remain in the body.
and it often happens that this vein is treated up to ten or fifteen palms in length, and one man came to me whose was ten palms long, and when you cut it, so it bursts forth with a flow or a perforation, and pierces right through to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
and let the matter inside be emptied, and bring to place medicines that have not been prepared for any day, then cure as abscesses.
And at times to this vein many raindrops fall, and indeed when it opens in the joints of the foot or foot, and there comes out much pus, and then many raindrops;
then cure it as we have said before.
Moors that are born between skin and flesh. This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it often afflicts oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes all around the body rising and falling, and the patient feels it well from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it is going, and jumps forth.
and is caused by purtification of some humors, such as come from worms and serpents and lumbri and ascarides or the belly.
and one doubts of his evil because when it goes through the body and it climbs to the head and comes to the eye by chance it returns and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cure and pull out, one cannot avoid but when it goes:
then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tightly tied ligature, then cut on top and pull out what protrudes, and if the tip is embedded deeply in the flesh and you cannot remove it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming up to the head near the eye, then press down below it with a strong seal, then cut on top and pull out what protrudes;
and it is necessary to use the patient with a cleansing of the body by soluble medicines for bad humors brought on, and beware of eating foods that produce corruption.
From the pain that comes from windiness. This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member;
and I have seen what I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rising also like a worm on the shoulder, more quickly than anything, just as hot silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder, and then soon after it ran all over the body, until it came to the other arm;
Then she told me that it was turning around the body, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner before. However, I had wanted many things to move well from one place to another, but I did not want it, just as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins uncovered, and therefore that apparition appeared constrained;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are plump, and who have moist bodies and veins responsive.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then cut on top until that constrained ventosity issues forth from the place. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it to your eyes, so treat it with the remedy of those who calm the vapors, such as stinking pills and viper's pill, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
The diversity of theirs is that there are some who have great points, small ones, hairy ones, and roughened ones. and those who have two angles, and those who have tongues, and those where there are fragments;
and that which falls in any member, if it falls according to two manners: or in principal members such as head, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, warn you: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many conditions; and when this evil sign does not warn you at all, and the arrow is not exactly out, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And when the brain sign appears when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the spinal cord that is above the brain is torn, it is when there is blindness and numbness and confusion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of gall. and possibly it is without force from the nostrils or ears; and possibly it impairs speech and voice; and leaping from the moist white wound resembling pustules, and also jumping like a bruise of flesh.
and if this sign appears, then take care of it and pull out the arrow if it's not stuck.
The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and by chance the arrow moves as well as the hair, and in cold black blood, and comes with shivering and cold sweat, and fainting. then know without doubt that death is impending.
And the sign of the arrow that strikes the spleen is when without any foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient's color changes, and sighs deeply and searches for cold air.
And if the arrow hits in the covering of the liver, it is on the small ribs. and vomits great bile and great pain and sighs. and all the limbs of the shoulders are numb.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, by chance something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes the belly and bursts forth through the intestine route, there is no hope for recovery or in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels very painful. Know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and back of the neck and rib cage and hip and knees and legs, and a similar limb, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
An arrow fell at home on the threshold of the neighbor's garden. I pulled it out and drew it under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
And drew out an arrow that had fallen in the fat of the eye under the paper, and the arrow was bent back, and could only be retrieved as far as the point towards the fist, and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, and very light without ears.
The eye was healed, and no bad accident came to it.
And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I pulled out the barbs, and extracted it slowly as I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And draw out an arrow from the man whose was shot in the belly, thinking that he was dying;
and then after having passed 30 days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out further, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you see the man to whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural dispositions did not change, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural activities.
And if you see another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound was sewn up; and remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many similar things.
And draw out an arrow from the king of the princes, who had been struck in his thigh, and was slightly declining to the right side; and was the arrowhead fully covered.
I was summoned to the treatment after she had fallen three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for her in every subtle tent and did not find her. and he felt a pricking and pain beneath his right earlobe.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put on the wound a plaster that is attractive and digestive, because the lump did not swell. and the wound from the arrow appeared.
and the wound from the arrow appeared. I put the plaster on for many days and the wound healed above, and the patient remained that way for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead within his body one day.
and he told me. I put on the wound medicine that is corrosive by many days, until it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck in the joint.
Then I inserted into the opening of the wound by this medicine's aid, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and exceeded the terms by about four months, and then healed so well that I put in forceps and pulled apart and couldn't get out;
then I did not cease to subtilize and ingeniously devise various methods of instruments, until on the first day I got well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as I was guiding it, and restored the wound.
And the doctor judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was bound up, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you set your care upon what I do not say, for books cannot take everything.
but wise masters know well to treat small things and what is present and failing, find nine remedies, and nine instruments, for the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not emerge from members where they are stuck unless according to two manners: or by the way they enter, or by another place;
and that which jumps out far from where it enters is an arrow entering the fatty parts of the flesh, and sometimes this happens now.
And if it doesn't jump out now, then let it stay until the fatty parts are gone around, and the exit is opened.
and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then let it stay like this for some days, and move each day;
And then it jumps; and if it does not jump, so pierce around all the way to the subtle forest, until the surrounding bones are widened, and then treat.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it so that the wound is great;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at which it is stuck, then remove the flesh that is stuck two parts away from where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as far as you can, until you can pull it out;
and be subtle that you do not break the arrow, lest you pull it out more painfully.
And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the skin around it is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you disagree, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and think how you can pull out the arrow without danger, either soon or late, or firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot, then place him as the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it appears to be near him, or the skin is swollen in front where one can see or feel apparently.
then cut on up, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out. if it jumps out now.
And if she is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now and then re-start the extraction until it comes out finally.
and if the arrow is stuck inside him, soak his entire body in water;
and if the arrow breaks, and you have to administer binding, then administer the instrument shaved, so that the point of the arrow goes into the hair of the instrument.
and then push forward, and if the arrow is stuck, then insert the instrument with a pointed end into it to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you cut all around the flesh where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be treated.
And if the arrow is stuck in the head or side or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it's nearby, you can cut on top of it, then cut.
and take care not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then pull out, and then cut the wound if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which one handles arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: great, moderate, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, in order to push forward at the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped here.
There are 31 veins from which one can bleed oneself, of which there are 16 on the head, namely: Two veins that are located after the ears, which are called "herbeches"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appear; and the two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two sinewy things that are in the neck; and the two veins that are in the upper lips above the mouth, and they are called "augerich"; and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins by which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people commonly call it "the vein of the head"; and the median is called "femoral", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people commonly call it "the vein of the heart"; and the spleen is situated in the right side of the belly, and the common people call it "the vein of the belly", and it is located above the kidneys, and it is that which is cured, which becomes manifestly apparent on the abdomen.
And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the wrist and the ankle, and it has two branches.
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is under the armpit of the left side, and the second saphenous one that is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nerve" which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The cure of the veins that are after the ears helps ancient headaches and migraines;
and the qualities of a healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and stroke the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a strap, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent folds from the head. and then at your discretion, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, so seize it;
then take the lancet, and push it down through the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire vein above, and cut through the skin and the vein as much as the length of two fingers, and let out blood until you see.
then bind it tightly so that it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The wound of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migraines ancient and old, and sighted, and accustomed to ophthalmia, and in the course of hot tears to the eyes;
and the qualities of the surgeon are such as I say: and that the patient stretches out his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below your thumb, and then signs with nodding;
then lift the key on the vein above your thumb index, and push the lancet down, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and make the incision according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then place a cloth on it; and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have spoken of their binding and extraction, in the beginning of this book.
The wound on the forehead vein is worth as much as the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face, and in migraines, and in headaches;
and its quality is that the patient stretches his neck twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein so that it is healed, and not once make a wide ligature.
However, it's not fitting that the flames be too strong; and the blood flows in a cross shape, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The juice of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and the acne, and the redness, and the yellowish coloration in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their juice are such that the patient strains his neck by twisting from some kind of bond, as before;
then the blood, and let it be like the traverse, about a finger's breadth long, about a span wide, because there is no fat. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
then make a compress of blood, as much as you need it, and then bind it with cloth, and bind it well.
The blood of the vein of the night is worth as much to age, and also foreseen, and also diseases of face, so as emigraine and redness that comes on the face, and indeed when it is old;
and the qualities of the blood are such that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose to the left hand side, and takes the subtle flame long, and puts it in between the lip space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will start flowing now.
and do not flow too much in front, and let the blood run according to your need, then bind it overnight, for it is quickly restored;
The blood of the two groins helps to narrow down the swelling, and at the beginning of flux, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and sores;
and the quality of the sickness is that the patient stretches his neck from under one and the other, as we have said;
and the master is standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient sits on the stool, then opens the vein a little bit widely, then draws out blood temperately, or as long as it is necessary.
then does the other side on the other vein, then loosens the ligament, and holds it steady in the middle, so that the patient does not choke. and leaves him until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the healing of wounds The bloodletting of the veins above the lips is helpful for bleeding in the mouth, and for corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and around the neck.
and the quality of the sickness is that you have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I said; then turn your lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is to the right lip and the other to the left, and they are known by this that they are black, and because around them there are small black veins:
cope then one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and do just the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
Of the healing beneath the tongue The bleeding from the veins that are below the tongue helps greatly after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient takes a seat between your hands before the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks down at each side into one black vein;
bleed then one and the other, and do not go too deep in, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two manners:
out of all fiery myrrh large, or olive subtle as cutting trenches, and is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the breadth and narrowing of veins. The form of the mirtin incision is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood apparent, and which contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the olive oil flame;
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the breast, and at the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bind tightly and to beware of the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a great deal of blood comes forth, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and it must not be poking the flame, but cutting as with a shears.
And if the basilica does not open visibly, then you should extract it and change another one. or you take some of it away from him, or you let blood flow into his arm instead. it opens visibly; and cut the flesh with a flame-like instrument, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you grasp the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse. then mark the place with a ring and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a flame-like instrument; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery: Fix the wound then.
And if you see it flow upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from an artery. Hurry then, and place your tourniquet on lengthwise, then remove it if the bleeding ceases, for this often happens. If the arm breaks, and let it be so, and do not move the patient's arm;
and be on guard, and do not move the patient until he is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched, and it flows, and medicine is not present to you, then compress the artery if it opens, for the head of the vein retreat. and stop the bleeding.
And take a membrane of fig bark, and hollow it out, and take one half and tie it on well to the other day.
If the blood stops flowing, it's fine. if not, then if you treat it with the powders that stop the bleeding,
and the stopping of the bleeding is not guaranteed in many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The vein of the neck in a mixture so helps to treat blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary of the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, he will find the nerve, and it will swell and the bleeding will not cease, and by chance cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must tie the arteries with anestil. and shield the nerve from your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The vein of the cephalic side helps, which draws blood from the head and assists the eyes.
and it is necessary to bleed when pricking the flappy part of the olive or mint vein, because this is the most saving of all veins, for there are no nerves nor arteries underneath. However, it is necessary to seek the lighter spot, and do not trouble anything if it does not work the first time, and we start again. and by chance, some people's veins fill at the first attempt, but it does not trouble anything.
The quality of the pulse is according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is not done except to preserve health, and to prevent illnesses from coming.
and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are at the throat: To know, cephalic, swift, and basilica; and one should be cleansed at the beginning of prayer hours in springtime and autumn after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one should be cleansed on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
The cleansing that is administered for diseases has no fixed time, but whenever it is needed in the morning or at night, in all hours and at all times.
and it is not necessary to cleanse children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant for less than seven months. And one should not heal those who have passed 60 years of age.
And when someone wants to cleanse themselves in whatever way, it is necessary that he reveals the intestines with a light enema, if they have many foul humors retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous substances harmful to the main members.
one does not heal well who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, until he has purged himself.
and one does not heal well after a violent passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequent staying with a woman, and travail, watching, and sleeping, and all that is contrary to virtue, or by something of war or of body.
then adjust the humors, if the blood is thick, with meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter or take a bath, if nothing else prevents, to subtilize the blood, and heal from the wound around the third hour, as we have said.
and guard yourself that day from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
And be seated and joyful, and let the surgeon stand higher than he who is being treated, and rub the arm twice or three times, then loosen the tie above in a gentle manner, for when it is too tight or too loose, the blood cannot flow.
and then rub the joint with your hands until the veins swell, and one senses it;
then moisten the surgeon's cloth with a small amount of old oil, then place the tip of his left hand on that vein below the joint, about a finger's breadth where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not flee and fail from being pricked.
For there are veins that flee like strings from the surgeon, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the cloth on it, the cloth retires, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is among those; and if he opens the vein, then is the wound too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the physicians be informed about these things.
And if the vein works the first time, that's good; if not, then one reopens it again a little below or above hastily if the swelling is not gone.
And if the swelling is gone and the patient is reassured, then one lets him stay for a day or two and does not bind the arm. in case abscesses will arise soon;
nor does one enter water, then reopens the wound if it pleases him;
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much blood as you see, then trust in that same opening to drain properly all the way.
and do the work with some haste, yet when the limbs are swollen; for it often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not begin to bind it again, and apply a little bit of oil on top, for it lightens the body from blood, and is good for this limb as is the oil.
and thus administer the oil in each binding that you bind the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and the same is done with triangle and blue ointment, when it is applied to the limb; so that the blood flows and separates when it is too thick.
And if there comes a great abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not bound more than once or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and apply a wet sponge to the limb in warm water and silk for a little while.
and it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if it stays at its place for some days with no blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him. and if you see, put on something with aloes or myrrh mixed with calaminth juice, poultice, or similar.
And many times there is abscess and swelling at the joint of the basilica:
put then your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, then that swelling is bad. Be careful not to put anything on it of what we have said, for by chance the artery might be cut off.
but make a plaster on it so as to harden the place, then apply another cure until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
If the blood is black, then let it flow out until it is red. and if you see it thick, then let it be thinned out until it becomes subtle. and if it is too hot, then let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, to make the wound wider and the flaps larger.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and make it heal little by little, and one should make it heal by cutting across, not by piercing.
and this manner of healing saves from the loss of blood and the compression of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
And for one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in apple juice. If he is heated, treat him with blood three times or four; And if he has a cold complexion, treat him before the wound becomes wet and slimy in a sweet syrup, or in a scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and with well-scented syrup.
If he has palsy of the vein, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks a decoction of charcoal and subtle aromatic syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to flex his arm and be healed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And if he wants to flex his arm after the first treatment, and he has a strong body, then he heals in about 7 hours after the first treatment, or around the ninth hour.
And if he wants to be healed from another part, then he should be treated again on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body which is already heated, and it brings forth fever; so that one must draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the aperture until it can be drained freely. then you must reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulses when he is healing, lest death come in place of healing, and this happens many times, when the healers are neglectful;
and it is not necessary when you see the arm dislocated and bleeding again, and the aperture is closed, that you press strongly upon it; If he is bent, let him straighten his arm quickly, for it would be bad.
but let him leave it until he recovers the second time; or you put the point of the flame to the tip of the vein until the blood that has frozen in the puncture flows forth, and put on a poultice of silk rewet in water, and press slightly.
And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, then let him bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein within the arm is treated at the location of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the scab is red.
then be bound slightly, so that the vein appears well, then heal now through the center, not through the width or length.
and be the puncture wide, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, then do not put my hand into hot water, for one puts it in winter rather than in summer.
and the vein of this wound is more saved from all other wounds, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The vein on the palm of the right hand is worth more than all other diseases of the liver, and this is how:
strain the hand and put it in hot water, until the wound is drained, so that one may see it; and if the vein goes awry, and you cut into it entirely, then nothing will hurt.
and do not cut too deeply into the bone, for the nerves are underneath all stripped of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the pus is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have bled out as much as is necessary, then put oil and gall on the vein to speed up the healing, and do this for each one.
The wound on the left hand is good against mouse disease, and do everything in the same way as I told you for the right hand.
The sickness of the sophene is worth to all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of his urine are such that the patient pours some water into hot water, and rubs on the vein so long as it bleeds, and above the jointure of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins going;
then take out the largest vein, or the one at the ankle, which is worth more.
And if you take out the vein above the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cut across in a straight line as when cutting.
and let the edges be even.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the needle fails the first time, then repeat the second at a spot above, because the flesh is salty;
do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same to the other foot equally.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its wound is good against the pain of the backside when it is for hot blood.
And the quality of his urine is such that the patient enters the bath and strains above the knee four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
and if it opens, then allow the urine to flow in all ways you can, and crossing over. and it is worth moving than cutting, for the wound is sound, and it is very red to many people.
and it is worth moving than cutting, for the wound is sound, and it is very red to many people. And if you do not find it, then let the urine flow from any part of him that opens, or from the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
and let so much blood flow as you see, and then loosen the bandage, and put on linen and tighten it. it is now healed.
Poultices are made from horns, or tin, or glass;
and wind-sweating is done according to two manners: or by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
And this wind-sweating which is without wounding is done according to two manners: or it is done with full force, or without force;
and wind-sweating which is done by wounding and drawing blood is done in fourteen places of the body, where one is entirely on the top of the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the ventoses under the chin; and the ventoses on both shoulders; and the ventoses above the hips; and the ventoses in both arms; and the ventoses on both legs; and the poultices of two ankles;
and the application of poultices does not concern blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore one should not weaken it too much, just as with bleeding from a vein. and it is not suitable that she be administered, nor in any fire or sense of fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if due to necessity of diseases it is necessary to apply poultices, or for habituations, we should administer each one hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in each season.
for there are some who, when they have need to apply poultices, then have a heavy head;
and there are some who turn red with repletion and flush in their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness falls upon the eyes;
and those who spit out a drop of blood from their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and redden with blood; and if there are those who dream, and see through blood and hurt and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The sap of the mummy so helps with the grevously wounded head... that comes to the eyes, and it does not seem right that this should be after the evacuation of all the body's blood.
and this purging is in place of the sap of the cephalic, and it does not seem right that one who is of cold complexion or has catarrh should use it, for it causes them very great harm.
and therefore it does not seem right that the elderly in use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who recover from this often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the leech a little lower by the fear of forgetfulness.
The purging in the neck is in place of the sap of the head and of the brain, and therefore it is good for constriction of the stomach, and for rending the channel of the womb, and for all, and for fullness.
et it is necessary to force slowly, for if she holds too tightly, so one will encounter obstruction or indigestion or heart trouble.
The swellings on both sides of the neck are worth the pains in the head, and obturation and emigration, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is equal to the health of the basilica.
and you must instruct the surgeon to extend his hand when placing, not to cut the artery, and not to let blood flow excessively.
The swellings under the chin are worth mouth diseases and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is equal to the health of both lips.
The leechings on the shoulders are good for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
The swellings on the sides are worth as much as three veins in the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the lord not to strike too deeply by fontanelle, for the bone is bare of flesh, and knows below nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids from the foundation, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large and made of earthenware, so it may well draw out. and by chance, if she were subtle, she would break; and it would make large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs so plainly heal, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth for ancient pains of kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and restore flowers;
and they are in place of the two shins and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring on paleness in many dispositions.
The manner of applying the poultice is that you put it on first empty, and then squeeze it temperately, and apply it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the red flesh appear and the blood well up.
Then boldly, and replace the poultices, and take heed to the condition of bodies, for there are some who have dry flesh and clear pores. it is necessary to wound once only, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one a little deep. and squeeze lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to wound twice: the first time to thin out the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to wound a third time;
and when we want to let out a little bit of blood little by little, if it suffices just once. And if we want a lot of blood, then we repeat the process often;
and if the blood is thick, then pierce it deeply, and make sure that the veins are perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have tough skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you anoint the soles of the adhesive plasters with open and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is in winter, with oil of wormwood, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balsamic oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
And if one's skin is tender and has large pores, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but rather wash after the leeching with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin seed water, or porcelain flower water, or similar.
And that person who has much moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive swellings drink old wine, or water of salsify, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or something similar;
and it is not necessary to heal with a poultice before bathing or bathwater, but after the bath for one hour or two.
and he does not sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be poultriced and when he is poultriced.
And beware of those who are sick choleric temperaments, and if their blood is too hot and inflamed. so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green grapes and endive and lettuce in abundance, and similar things. and tender meat, and flesh of capon, and moist meat.
and tender meat, and flesh of capon, and moist meat. And he who has a cold complexion, so take honey syrup and aromatic wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and tender meat, and tender birds and small game.
and when he will gather himself, so must he drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before the sweating, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and let the sweat be fine, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The poultices that are applied without hurting are those that are applied on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach and the bowels and the kidneys and the loins, for these members do not suffer being hurt there, and one only does so to draw blood from member to member, as we apply them on the breasts when the milk runs.
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply poultices on the stomach and on the bowels to reduce the member.
and stays the pain when there is inflammation or stone; so stays by its attractive virtue the inflammation or separates the stone from its place.
and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the menses when there is retained windosity; and these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suckle only so much. and at times they are administered together with fire, and at other times plain water, as in the diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water only, or with water that has been boiled with herbs suitable for this.
The shape of the poultice administered at fire is this:
And it should be two and a half palms of perfunctory depth, and have or coat the surrounding area around the mileu with a small pit, as if to insert an awl, and be of iron, so soft beforehand that it does not wound the patient when putting it on the member.
and let it be with one hundred and twenty a beam of crossbow or iron, to put a candle in place, and there are many and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for children's poultices are different from old people's, and thin people's from fat people's.
And one must thus put this poultice on the member:
take the candle of wax or ointment, and put it in the middle of the poultice on the beam that is inside the poultice, so that the light may be at the bottom of the poultice that it not burn the patient.
and then put it on the member, and let it be on the boil that we have said, so that when you want, if there is steam, remove the poultice.
and apply the ointment just as before, and continue to reapply it often if you need to.
In the cupping glass then which is administered to a patient with pleurisy, there is no stick nor pimple, and it is only brought out when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member as soon as.
and that's the shape
Cupping glasses are only brought out when used for members where it is not possible to put cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare bones that are denuded of flesh, like the head or neck, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses that are in clear and pure water without any perturbation, then take them;
and put them in cool water until they are familiarized, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be healed by vein and by poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on bandages;
and when they are clean and dry, and can be used to put a poultice, then one puts it there, because this is very good afterwards.
If not, then lift the limb by easy stages, and then by water, very well, and then tighten it.
and if the limb heals too late after the application of poultices, then wet a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the poultice is congealed.
and if the poultice is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is congealed.
or you put on the limb half of peeled broad beans, and let them stay until they dry to the limb, so it will stop bleeding now.
and if you need more assistance, take other surgeons.
And if the surgeons do not want to take it, then moisten the wound with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the pus issues, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will set.
and when you see that they are flowing, then powder with a little alum and vermilion, or ashes, so they will now stop.
This begins the book of fractures. This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a treatment for fracture and desiccation.
Know, dear son, that foolish men throw themselves away from this chapter, for they have never seen anything in the old books nor read a letter about it.
and because of this reason is estranged the science from our land, for I never found any good.
and I know nothing except by the science of ancient books, or that I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and through experience, and through the habit of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and shortened it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are provided, as I have done in these two chapters previously.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and another; if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or infants, or old people; or if the weather is not too cold, or too hot;
and also cold cholera, that is to say, cold fits, and the flesh of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with flesh which fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about hot aposteme or expansion of matter in the member;
if the patient recovers to his previous good state which he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a good nourishment, or he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and belly of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and rich wine, and similar things. For with good nourishment, the muscles are restored more quickly and the break is healed sooner.
And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well restored or joined according to their nature because of the decay of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but don't worry, reset on the broken bone with strong cords that bind and join the member together, until it is as strong as it was before. and don't leave him without his work, and therefore he must be nourished with big meats, as we have said.
And know that breaks are diverse in many ways.
For a break of the head is another thing than a break of the breast or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks. For there are breaks that occur by twisting, and others by bending, such as the cutting of a quill to write.
For there are breaks that occur by twisting, and others by bending, such as the cutting of a quill to write. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with all a small split.
And for every way, let him have his own device, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory brings into its place;
and it is known that the break of the bone is by twisting, and it appears well by departure, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
et when there is no twistedness nor at the touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have twistedness, or crack, or small break. So you must not move it by hand, but put on medicines that come after this, and then restrain it subtly.
And know that the breakage that occurs in arching, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them back together evenly, otherwise abscesses will come to life there.
and if abscesses hotly come there, then let it be left alone for a day, until the abscess is calmed down.
then set it equal to the movement that you can make lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is more light than the restorations of those who have pieces.
then restrain it, as it is fitting hereafter.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, two parts long, whether it is arm or leg, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and your hand.
et set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are dislocated, then reset by all means the adductions in their places as far as you can, and take care that through your work does not come to the patient injury or pain.
and set well the two bones of the skeleton according to the best forms.
And feel by hand if it seems to you that it is not well.
so that it be set well, and not strained too much, nor pressed as those who bring about apostemic heat and contraction in the member through their work, as we have often seen.
And when the member is set right, then chastise the patient so that they do not move it, nor in waking nor in sleeping, nor in turning, nor in any other way. and take care that the member be so secure that it feels no pain at all. When he feels no pain, except perhaps at the tip, it is necessary to put him in such a state that he feels no pain.
and take care that the member be so secure that it feels no pain at all. When he feels no pain, except perhaps at the tip, it is necessary to put him in such a state that he feels no pain. and take care that he be set straight, so that twisting does not occur when he is restored.
and the quality of the broken member is as I am telling you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is necessary to envelop him with soft and subtle linen cloths. and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
so it is necessary to envelop him with a wide and strong linen, because the wide linens encircle all the large member evenly, so that there is no defect.
then wrap it with light cloths, three turns or four according to the member, and hold your hand a little tight on all the linen, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break will move away a little from the break.
and soften it gradually, little by little, until you take away a great part of the healthy flesh, then take hold of another ligament and turn around above the broken joint;
then return to the part below the break and strain it moderately, not too hard nor too gently, as we said in the first lesson above;
then put between the ligaments strips of linen or cloths, until they are all even, then tie everything above with bandages, and then put your well-made straps on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put something calming and hot on it that removes the swelling, and let it be like that for some days;
then strain over your straps and let them be of the middle of a well-seasoned ash stick, or of fir wood that makes clubs, or of palm tree saplings, and let them be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the break be a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it is needed for the member of smallness or greatness; then stretch it on the splints just like you did at the first joint, then tie above with a thread conveniently, just like at the first joint above the break; the tighter it is stretched up, the looser it should be down;
and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of fine linen;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bonds with cordage twisted in tortuous ways, and it's a great error, because the bond cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have between each splint less than two fingers' breadth.
And if the patient is injured by the points of the stakes after the straining in their own flesh, then put under them strips of linen or wool, so that he may not be hurt.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will say the treatment hereafter.
And know that it does not need to strain on all the members that are broken on the first day. For when the limbs are great, it is not necessary to put splints more than after four days or seven, or more according to the security of abscess happening afterwards;
and here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of plaster restoring breaks in various conditions, and indeed for women and little children, for it is not either too hot or too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists: take aloes, ladanum, unguent, asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mix them in the proportion of ten to one. Mirror and aloe, five ounces; Aloe juice nine ounces; and make it into powder, and mix with the white of an egg; if a man's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it quickly restores broken bones, and is worth to many people.
Another way of plaster that is worth for twisting: Take muggite and muskavle, ten ounces; Mirror and aloe, nine ounces; Vinegar six ounces; Boiled Armenian ten ounces, and grind well, and mix with water or the white of an egg, and administer.
Another way of plaster for joints and bones that are out of their places, and relieves the pain happening, and they use it to shape the bone and the breaking: Take a new linen, and marinate it in vinegar and oil cooked, and place it on the sore.
These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removing pains.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of earthbound burdock, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to ease the remaining abscess. Take root of Vismalve, Chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of poppy, each one a part.
and grind, and mix with wine, and apply it to the members that are inflamed, or if it's not inflamed, mix it with moist water of coriander, or water, and use.
Another way to plaster even stronger than the first one, when abscessed flesh comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of Vismalve, and seeds of flax, Balaustie, Mellilot, and Sandwort, and flowers of violets and Chamomile, each one a part. and crush, and cook with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything more than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else besides, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to plaster that is good for wound and pain: take mallow and hawthorn of men's heads, or feathers of birds, and marshmallow, and equalize them, and crush, and make a plaster and lay it.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if you do not loosen it by main days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
and take light linens, and moist sea sponge, and plunge it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it up with a nut, until you are certain of no hot abscess;
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and may the pain be removed, then resume the subtle bandage, and apply a little ointment, and do not strain it as hard as before; and gently until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is gone and redness, pain, and swelling are all removed from it, and you need to use ointment and bandage again, then resume, as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not remove it until after three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the splint is secure and approaches the union with the flesh above.
then restrain it more than before, and let the swelling of his meat increase, as I said before;
and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that pus cannot come. then bring forth hot water mixed with vinegar, every time you loosen it, and let each third day pass, and slightly relax the ligature.
by this work, then cut off the pus from the member, and quickly do what foolish physicians do, who leave the member twisted.
it is bad, and it is poor work, and I see nothing else but to tire and toil correctly.
There are many kinds of breakages and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined;
for there are breakages that are caused by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone takes out all the bone just up to the shaft which is under the bone, as a hack or fist does. and therefore this manner of breaking is called "haichure".
Where the sword pierces the bone above and senses it, and this manner of breaking is called "absolute".
and the wound from these two breakings is great or small.
And if there is a stuck percussive blow, or a splitting or collar bone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persisting break that approaches just to the tendon which is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound that is opened in the bone is as subtle as a mouse, and it is a small crack, and therefore this breaking is called "capillary".
and if the wound that is made or caused by striking with a stone, or falling, or something similar, and causes the bone fragment to go down, and it is hollow like when blacksmiths heat metal on furnaces. if into the bone inside.
And this happens more in those who have or whose head is moist like that of an infant;
and there occurs all these ways of breaking where small parts are dislodged as if they were. and I will speak to him in his place.
And we know all ways of breakings by stripping away from them, and inquiring into tests, and through the corrupted flesh that is above.
The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then opens up the black break.
In the treatment of the break, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of gall, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar things in more or less dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unendurable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounds come to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day if you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the tendon below the bone will be corrupted, and the accidents we have said will come.
And if the break of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus:
and take the chief of the injured patient, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and on the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if blood flows from the dismemberment, or an abscess forms, provide the aid that is needed, and then fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down, and be assured of the cessation of blood flow. then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of work:
One manner is that you bind at the constricting part before, and it's like this:
And then I put another cutting larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have many diverse constrictions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron.
and work lightly, so that you don't cut the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it's necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer constrictions with tweezers, not too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the testicle, and there should be above the point a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
and it's necessary for you to have many of them, so that each one comes to its place on the edge of the bone, so that you have tweezers for all tests.
and this is the form of three types of parricides:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one parricide on the bone and turn to your two sides until you know the bone is pierced.
Then place the parricide elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertues, and make it more subtly than you can, and lightly, just as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, forceps;
and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is fitting that you take the apoplectin which remains of the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more sharp and more subtle than the other incisor.
and if it has none of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with the instruments; then treat the wound of tents and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is more sound; and the oath very strong, and it is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears more clearly; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place below the head of this lenticular incisor, which has this form:
And do not cut on one side only, and the wound should be in two parts, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chip away the bone all around, and take great care not to touch the membrane that is below;
if it is attached to the bone, then remove it lightly, for one removes it without harm and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only on top, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape away the scales with a fine scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
Then use coarse scrapers first, and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-like cuts and subtle breakings, it is necessary that you bring about a cause according to its direction;
and this is something that is not replied to by one who has put their study into this art.
And if the boil is uncovered, it's necessary that you take a cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth. and do this as lightly as you can, so that you don't irritate the boil, then administer above the other layer, and don't strain it more than is necessary to keep the wound simply.
and let it be like this for one day or two, until the abscess is appeased, then loosen it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things.
and make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer thereafter medicines without biting.
and wait until the wound is clean again, so you don't leave an ointment or let the bowels assemble above the brain's skin, for when the bowels gather above the brain's skin, they will run and burst forth, and the patient will suffer great harm.
for when you put a biting thing on the abscess, it necrotizes above it. Take heed therefore, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if the swelling does not come forth except through the medicine you have put on, and it has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and mix in one cloth, and apply it to the abscess. then continue with the treatment by the means of treatments that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nail above are broken, or one alone by itself, for they are two bones.
and that part below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it becomes twisted or bent, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you plug your little nail or perforation of the nail with wax and put this breakage into your thumb's index finger, and then press firmly, until the nail regains its natural shape. and do it gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the head of a rod, rather large.
And if the break is in two parts, do it the same way, and try to restore the first part as soon as you can, if you can.
unless that, after seven or ten days, when the abscess is appeased, then plug at the top of the nail with linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Where you push one apart from the other, if there is a break within. and be so large that they fill the hollows of the night.
And they said some physicians that one must soak tents in butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be moistened in the making of a poultice with egg whites and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hardened and the ligaments are toughened.
And sometimes one uses owl's down instead of tents, and if there is a soft wrapping around it, and the dislocation holds fast, and blows the patient through. or do what you see.
And if an abscess appears on the neck while you are working there, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of aquilione.
And if the abscess does not come forth, then apply an ointment by pouring out, with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg whites, and place it on light fires, and do not bind the night.
et if the breaking of the nail is small and it is broken into little pieces, so one would lead it to suitable instruments for this, then mend the breakage, and cure things in the same manner as plasters and ointments are suitable for this;
and if there is no wound inside the nail, so one would treat it with tents, and put in plugs of pitch, until it is healed.
When the lower jawbone is out of place, and there is no wound to drain, and the break is only so slight that it is not actually broken in two, except perhaps inside, then one knows this lightly.
It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you bite your two fingers and place them in the mouth of the patient. and if the breakage is on the left side of the jaw, so bite your two fingers of the right hand, and gently insert the breakage into them, and set it straight with the other hand by degrees.
And if the jawbone break is separated into two pieces, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until they are even.
And if the movement of teeth causes a gap or a routure, so strain them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then put a waxed pad on the broken jawbone and place a double cloth over it. et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite,
And if you see that the shape changes, then release it on the third day, and then set it back to its original shape. and put plaster on top, with powder from the mill and a great deal of egg or fine wheat flour, after you have removed the gauze.
and put a thin layer of plaster on top, and if the plaster dries, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed. Many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes forth, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, leave no fragment of the bone that has been removed; if the removal is done with subtle instruments fitting for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it as needed.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then sew the wound shut, if it is wide, and put on top suitable poultices to promote flesh, until they are healed.
The forceful blow breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the breakage is in three manners:
where she is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is lighter to restore.
where there is a break with wound.
And the work is thus when there is no wound with the break, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken force. and the other stretches out the neck towards the part;
then place the break evenly between your knees, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor hindrance.
And if you need to extend further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round wooden or woolen staff, and make it thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the broken part, and strain the staff in your hand, so that you place the break, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele forward because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatrail, and put under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow, and have the assistants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
And then address the break to your knees, and if you find it fragmented, so it is necessary that you split it above.
and pull the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any adjustment, then cut at one of the dividers that you have. but make sure to put this instrument underneath the forceps, in order to hold the screw:
and shape like a spoon, and not be chipped, and be as wide as it is needed, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work.
and have two handles, as you see, and one be large, and the other be strong, just like the shape of the wound that you made when you broke the bones.
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the breaking is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then use the wound dressing and tents, according to its size.
And if a hot abscess comes forth, then moisten one cloth with rose oil, and oil of lily, and wine, and put it on top.
The treatment of bone, when it is without wounds and without trimming, is that you put powder from the mill and egg white on the bone, and light stoppers above, and place a spear below the saddle, if you need it. Then take a very wide band of one palm's width, then put the cloth doubled above the stoppers and the plaster. Then take a thin band of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage are hanging. And put the band on the shoulder, and turn the bandage over the healthy side, and under the saddle sound, and under the saddle sick. And reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the shoulder well, and you clearly see that the band does not move on the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments relax, so restrain it.
and make the patient sit on his back, and place him while he sleeps with a small pillow underneath the armpit, to lift the aid in high. so that the strain on the shoulder strap is eased by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind unless bad accidents come, up to twenty days.
then restart the poultice, if you see that he needs it, and strain and leave it thus, until he is restored.
and she is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and to some people in less.
of the shoulder break
It often happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and it is not known to be inflamed except by the touch.
so that you arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
Then put powder of the mill on the joint with abundance of urine, and light bandages, and put it above the cloth doubled; Then put a large and subtle needle above an cloth, a little bit larger than the shoulder, and under the needle are threads in some place of the shoulder, so bind those threads with linen bandages so that the needle stays even.
And then bind it all with a great bandage firmly, so that the needle does not move from its place, and inspect the bond each day.
And every time it swells, bind it again, and put the needle back in its place if it is out of its place, and place the patient on their side.
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
And when this number is completed, then loosen it, and be careful, for it is not the bone that puts itself back together lightly.
And if a piece of the bone is bent forward and points downwards at the joint, then straighten it up and the bone, and do what we have said about calming down an abscess.
Of the breaking of the rib.
The weight is sometimes broken in mid-air, but this happens rarely. but it breaks often enough.
And when it is broken in mid-air, then it falls downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all, and by chance may vomit blood, and exposes the tendons in the broken bone, and one knows well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and carefully makes sure they are equal in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
then puts on poultices and plasters above the plate of salt or another light fabric, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it to the broken bone so that it does not move. and turns the bandage around to the back, and holds it tightly, and rewards each hour with wine, and if it relapses, then he holds it tight.
and if it is necessary to separate, because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the site, or pain or abscess, then hasten and separate, and scrape off the swelling, and address what has come forth in ways of treatment;
then reset the swelling, and restrain it until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the ribs.
Know that the breaking of ribs does not occur except in very large men after the back, and at the top inside, and it does not bend except because they are flabby. and he will feel it well during the examination that you must do.
And the remedy is that you put equal pressure on the break, as it should be. And then apply a poultice and bind with an iron band, if you need to.
And if the breaking of ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and pricking, just as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it leads to pricking, and all of them and vomiting great abundance of blood, and this is a grievous affliction, and the ancient ones have placed great cunning.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that fill the belly, in order to push the break backward.
We do not do this except when abscesses hot and present arise, if they have come. And if it has come, then it is healed.
And they say that you put poultices on the joint to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable. However, there is doubt whether the poultice attracts the superfluities to the joint due to its weakness.
And some of us say that you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to set equal the breathing around, then take care of the treatment of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which points to the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the joint of the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to protect the flesh.
and then one must cut the bone and draw it lightly, and then sew shut the two lips of the wound if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is healed.
And if an abscess comes forth, then put damp cloths soaked in rose oil on it and apply them to the joint.
and cure while the place of it is suitable for an abscess, and be watchful on all sides where it should, until it is healed.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor stretch them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that he is mortally ill in many dispositions, and if he moves and feels well when they are strained and pressed, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient is being cured, if one applies care.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take heed if the feet are soft, and if there are accidents in hand, and on the back sudden windiness and evacuation without will.
and when one has cured it on his belly, then evacuation occurs without will. And when he is overcome on his back and wants to settle down, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor much in his healing.
And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is easier.
And the remedy is that you apply oil of rose or oil of egg yolk on the spine if there is a hot abscess, so long as it is appeased;
Then place one of the soothing and drying poultices on it, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover the wound with a splint; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, and then treat it with ointment applying flesh until he is healed.
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", then put your pouch in your left hand and place it equal to your other hand at your power, then put the poultice and needle on, if you need them;
then pull it, and if there is a broken bone, do the same thing on it, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the hip bone.
When the hip bone is broken, and if it is, then there is a slight diminishment to the head. and becomes longer, and declines at the pelvis, and comes to the patient with pain in the place, and punctures, and swells what is broken.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, as far as you are above the break. and knows what kind of break it is and its shape is.
and if the break is only in the head, then set that break even, so that it be in natural form.
And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, so lie down the patient on their stomach until the restoration of that break is apparent. And when you have set it even, then put on the plaster, and then put on a wooden or horn splint, and restrain the break, so that it does not move.
and apply the place below the ribs, until the ligaments are even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their right side or back.
And if abscesses form there, do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and apply what we have said before. and then return to restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident.
of the shoulder break
The adjutories are those things that are between the shoulder's top and its head, and if they are broken, one must restore them according to one of the two manners:
one of which is that you take a fist-sized piece from the main growth, according to this form:
And tie the two heads with two strings, and pull them up high, and make the patient sit on a siege;
then let it go with the broken arm on the fist, until it comes to the joint, and has about half a cubit of fist, then pull up on something heavy or have the minister extend it down.
Then place the mirror's edge equal to his hands together, so that the edge returns as it should.
And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hat or headrest, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two attendants, one to hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other to hold below at each string, and stretch each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, so hold the ligament below the breastplate, and above the breastplate, and extend each of the assistants to their part.
And if the edge is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you place one end under the armpit, and the other at the back, under the edge.
and also if the edge is at the back, then it is necessary to place one end slightly, without effort, so that the edge is equal above and below.
Then set the edge equally as it should, and hold it, lest abscesses come to be there.
And if abscesses come to be there, do not hold it at all until seven days, and apply a warm poultice of linen and oil of roses, so that the abscesses are pacified.
then the restraint is, and the manner of restraining it is that you place the emplaster on the shoulder blade, then set the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
and put a cloth, and restrain it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not broken.
And if you doubt that the bone is not broken, use stakes, and place a stake larger and stronger than the others on the shoulder blade, with two spaces between each stake, and have each stake be as long as it passes three palms on each side.
then strain on the stakes, in the manner I said at the beginning of this chapter on the shoulder blade, stronger and less distant.
And if you see the seating of the stars and the stretching, as we have said, in the cure that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it alone until the seventh day, as we have said;
then look at each one after three days to see if the swelling or inflammation does not increase and come back to its place, or if the numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If you bind it, as we said.
And if no such accident comes, then do not release the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
and put a layer of equal thickness of clean linen underneath the support, and look at each hour of the day or night to see if the shape of the broken member does not change, or if the bandage is loosening.
If he is addressed through the power of medicine, and gives him food that we have placed before him, in such a manner that the food be for the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, if it is thick.
And it is custom that the assistant and the leg should be set back in forty days from then; and then one must loosen it and administer bath and ointment remedies to direct the joint.
And if the constriction is ugly and bound, so it must be untied in one or two months.
of the break in the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus", one of which is small and is that which supports the socket;
and the other is large, and it is that which is below, towards the small toe;
by chance, one breaks only the great humerus, or the little one, and by chance both together.
When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing.
and when the great ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
If it is a small bone that is broken alone, then it must be slightly extended and set even.
And if it is a great bone, then it must be drawn out with greater force;
and stretch it above the cushion, and hold the patient's hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others' bones, and let the patient cross over himself, with the cushion in front of him higher, that the patient does not suffer any pain.
Then stretch one of the ministers' arms to the part under his hand or to the joint, and another minister above.
And then set the mirror equal, according to its best form.
And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that are loose and cannot be held by force, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and use an osteum, as we have said before.
And if there is wound with bruising, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; Take care.
And if abscesses appear in the beginning of the restoration, take a poultice made from rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft. and apply the poultice gently above, until the abscesses are appeased.
And then remove the poultice, and put an ointment made from flour powder mixed with a great deal of egg, then apply the candles, and let the candle on the edge be stronger and a little bit wider than the others.
and know that it should have six candles or arms in multiple positions: or whether the burn is on one of the bones or two.
and hold it more above the burn than elsewhere, and always less away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the cloths that are on the dressing soft and moist, and not hard or dry.
and let the cloths that are on the dressing soft and moist, and not hard or dry. and be the thread, from which it is strained, of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the joint after some days. And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you wash the member with hot water, until those itchings are appeased.
and let the member not too tightly rest.
And then resume the stretching, and if the joint is relaxed and the bones are loosened, and similar things, then address it.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little bit and leave it thus for some days until the swelling comes, and then bind.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
or around it, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back.
and know that this dressing is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the bruise of the hand
Know that behind the hand and in the fingers many bruises occur, and there is no other way than to bend them many times.
And when the plantar aspect of the hand is broken or bent, it behooves the patient to cross his legs and sit straightly before him evenly.
Then places his hand on the spread cloth and stretches out the broken bones, making them equal with the splints, until they are well joined.
and applies the poultice and bandages, unless an abscess comes, then he puts in a stake according to the quantity of the swelling. and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth with a Y-fold.
And if the break is around the ankle joint of the foot, make a bundle of cloths and instruct the patient to wrap it tightly around his broken foot. and then strain it with a long cloth, and make the stake as thick as the plantar aspect of the hand, and strain it, as is fitting.
And if the bruise is on the outside, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another one underneath in the hand, so that the fingers be open and straight, then tie all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
And if the fracture comes to any of us from below, so it is a pouching, then set it even, as it should be; and strain with the sole, and if you see that putting a small straight stick will lift the fracture, and it does not move;
and if the fracture is at other joints, such as in the index or one of the others, then set it even and bind it with a bandage that is behind; or you tie them all together in one holding, as much as it is worth, or put on a splint like a pouched one;
and take heed in the restoration and setting of a hot abscess, and secure what comes out, as I have said.
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns in front and behind;
and the restoration is such that one ties above the breakage, and the other below. And the patient lies on their face, then stretches each attendant to their equal share.
and it is when the breakage is in the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the tailbone, so that one of the ligaments points towards the fingernail, and the other ligaments are below the break.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the straps be below the knee and the stretching be down.
Then place the splints on the bone equal to his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then put the poultice, and the bandage, lest abscesses come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it settle then return to your work and your treatment; The bandage is done in the same way.
You should wrap above the breakage with bandages doubled in two or three places, and remove any superfluous parts, then turn the leg so that the toes come to the root of the knee, and tie a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee on the underside, and let the end of the thread come up.
Then turn up on the leg and on the knee the bandage, then put on the breeching stays, and put one stay on the bone of the leg.
Then employ the leather strap between the leg and the knee of soft cloth to put equal tension, then begin to bind strongly three or four turns on the breeching. and when you go further up on the breeching, and loosen it less;
then take the two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and the knee, and tie three stays that are above, then return to the lower part at the head of the thread, until you come down below the foot.
and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until no swelling or abscess or other similar thing occurs. And if there is something wrong, then dislodge it, and address what comes next, just as we have said many times.
and if there are fragments of bone that are pricking, then it is necessary to remove them if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut through the flesh and pull forth; and treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
And sometimes the cup of the shoulder is broken thus one puts in stones as in the apothecary and on the arm;
nevertheless, in the restoration done thus the patient does not get better.
And know that the shin is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the diversities of complexions.
Knows that in the bend of the knee there is slight breaking, but it folds many times.
And if it breaks, it's not more than a crack or a pore, and it occurs in every wound, and without a wound, and this is well known.
And the restoration is when one puts back what is bent to its joints, as long as it can be moved.
then put the poultice on, and place a rounded stone if you need to, and bind it as is necessary, then reward all the preparations that we have said for other breakages, such as an abscess and similar things. If he sets to each accident what is due to him, so long as he is healed.
of the break of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, for which one is called by its right name "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
and it happens with all sorts of breakage as it comes to the arm, and for that reason is the restoration such as that of the arm equally, and the works are all done. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns wrong in every way.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the big bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and turns downwards.
Then apply an extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly;
but always, it is necessary if the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, that the extension be smaller and more gentle; and bind according to your strength.
And when you have completed all your work, take two straps of ash-colored wood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the kneecap down.
then wrap it in two layers of cloth above and below, and bind it securely in the middle as well, so that at this point the leg cannot bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
and no one should minister to the bones of the long length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and set the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the break or where there is injury.
and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident. If he cures as long as he is sound.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and two or three pieces, and in most cases it does not exceed more than four dispositions.
And if he has a break in the bone of his foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, where the bones are lifted up, and press it until they return to their place.
Then put the poultice and bandages on top, and under the foot of the foot a small piece of cloth to two full shoes, then strain the foot gradually, after you have wrapped around cloths and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if he has any of his toes broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; Then put an splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly larger, then put that piece of cloth I mentioned under the foot, and strain it gradually.
and if there are two or three, or more, break them; and place a stake on each one according to its size, wrapped in one fold of linen, and tie the table beneath the foot. and let it be so that on top of the stake is the opening of the table to go into the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, since we have spoken; and treat each accident as it deserves.
of the breaking of the bones of the wrist
When the bone of natural womanhood is broken, make her sit with an enlarged pelvis, then incline her towards the back part, and let it be held by the rear.
then fill the natural opening of the patient with cotton, and put in as much as the stomach is.
Then push away the woman, and lift the small of the back piece by piece, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and return the bone with its stop.
and when she wants to urinate, then remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or around. and then the break will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie it to the penis with a cord, and pour all the bladder into nature. then blow into the cord strongly, until the bladder is emptied inside. the nature will return to the break.
then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of man or woman is broken, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the hare.
and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use there and understands my book.
For the break signifies the right path of restoration in many dispositions. then understand this.
In the splint, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert it into the splint; then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for three days or eight around, and it will be healed quickly.
of breakage with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with an open wound, whether it be large like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to heal now, as the wounds that we have said bear witness.
And if the wound is healing, but then becomes infected with vinegar, and you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, lest abscesses form and do not come.
And if abscesses form, then leave the restoration alone for nine days, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the surface of the skin, it is necessary that you place it in slight extension with your hands.
And if the extension is not ready to put equal with your hands, then reattach it with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them, according to what he needs in each treatment of a break.
and let it be round and somewhat big, that it does not bend at all to the compression on the member in your work, and be arched forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved bone be placed on top of the apparent head of the bone; and tie it once, until it recovers, and let it be even with each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the top of the bone, until the instruments have power over it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we said, then use a suitable instrument to this end, or chisel or gouge, to your ability;
then gather up what remains in the bone of roughness and small scrapings.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
So do this until it is in its place, then soak the cloth in black medicinal wine, and properly clean what remains. and do not put any cerate or other substance on the wound where there is oil, unless you make it bring purification and corruption.
then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, and let the wound be uncovered, and cover the surrounding area entirely, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage.
and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, and they have brought upon the patient or death or corruption sometimes; and be the stitches more soft and gentler than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil consequences may come from it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put ointments on. but wrap around, instead of ointments, hard cloths and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days the bow to the wound, so take away what you put on top with all wine, and put in healing ointment for wounds, just as four-leafed ointment and similar things.
And it is necessary that you stretch the member two times a day, morning and evening, until it is fixed and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs are aligned in such a way that the bow string runs down lightly.
And if it happens that way for several days, and it cannot heal but instead swells again, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these disjointed pieces that bring forth that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, so it is necessary that you cure it, according to what is written in its chapter before this.
And when the bone is broken and appears on top of the member, just like the bones of the hip or shoulder, and other similar ones from the large members, do not pull it, for many times death ensues, but let it stay until it can be fixed.
by chance it will fall out after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often see after the breaking of bones, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a sad thing to behold the figure of the member. and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Take care then if our nail is fresh: if the administrator administers stiptic medicines, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, then take one of these things or all together, and mix it with wine, stiptic vinegar, or with an abundance of egg whites, or with oil. and places it on the nightstand in bed, and holds it tight, and does not remove it for three days;
and places it on the nightstand in bed, and holds it tight, and does not remove it for three days; and then unbinds it, and starts another one, until the swelling is gone;
or you bind on a well-made linen bandage; for the property of the linen is that it removes all swellings from above the limbs;
and if the swelling has already become hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut on top, and make the excess apparent; or you put it in someone's hands until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
of the member which is weak after healing
When the break in the bone is restored, and remains after the weak and subtle limbs, since it happens for many reasons: because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been. or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member; or because of abundance of swelling; or because of too great movements, not at its own time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make their body soft, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer bath, and give it joy and ease;
then put pitch on the member, so that the pitch attracts to the great swelling, and draws out often with water till the swelling goes into the member; and return to its natural shape.
of the twisted member after healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken apart, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function.
so do not believe the foolish people who say that one should break the member all over again, and many foolish physicians have done so in our land.
and this work is blamed, and brings great evils, and by chance death.
however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then it is necessary that they be applied with hot water, or herbs that soften, such as plantain leaves, roots, and mullein, and similar things.
and the plaster should be made soothing, such as diachylon well made, and you take the poultice of plantain, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top.
You take greasy figs, and crush them with henbane, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And at any time remove the swelling by continuous and lengthy rubbing with moist hands. And there should be a gentle movement to each limb every hour.
And if the swelling is hardened and calcified, like stone, and it needs to be opened with iron, so you must cut just up to the bone, with a fine, subtle incision. and put sense and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, so it is necessary now to bring it back into place.
For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and by chance, if one puts pressure on the swelling.
therefore it is not fitting to move him until he has deflated. many times brings on spasms and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, if it makes the patient better, then leave him, until the abscess is pacified.
then wet the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the treatment comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
The jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are slightly pulled out of their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the breast, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps around its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through many gentle procedures.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and not hesitate at all;
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts the mirror's speculum into one of his hands in the root of the jawbone dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is into two parts; and the other two hands be free to make it even;
and instruct the patient to soften his jawbone, and move it from all sides. And the fingers put it back in place, until it returns to its natural position.
And if it is stiffened, even if both jawbones together are stuck, so raise them with hot water and oil, until they become slightly loose.
do not neglect the setting back, as we have said.
And when they are set back evenly, and the patient's mouth feels well-mollified, so put on moist cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with moist bandages.
and the patient sleeps on his back, and his legs being between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he strain himself at all, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are freed.
and then let him eat as he likes lightly, and do not trouble to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well set and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not converted back to their natural state, then fevers and sore habits ensue, and possibly also bowel looseness, and possibly also vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a misfortune; and many times the person who has it will die within nine days.
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the chest within its continuity and from the breastbone, and is dislocated sometimes to the back, and it is well felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms. and then press the joint strongly onto your palm, and it will return;
then put on the poultice and the bandage, and tighten it.
and the shoulder that is near the cut cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it does dislocate once, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
Then put on the poultice and bandage, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and thus also bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways:
one of which is when it dislocates at the base of the neck below. and the second is at the part of the breast; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves;
and many times it dislocates downward toward the neck, especially in those who have little flesh, for they jump forth hastily;
Those who have enough fat, jump away from stones, and return to stones.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you try it out, until you are certain. and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it falls downward towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them. and you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the shoulder blade touching the top of the shoulder, just as if it were an ox. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their neck, nor move at all with any movements.
and also if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touching point.
and this kind of dislocation is not for anything but to bring back when it is new or if the child is sick.
And the method is that the servant lifts the patient's hand high up, then places the straps underneath the armpit, and lifts the joint upwards with force to its place. and the servant lifts the hand and stretches it high up, then places it underneath. so it will come to be quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we said in three days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water. and the amnestor should moisten and soothe it, as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and bring it.
then cover the patient with a blanket on their back, and put underneath the armpit a layer of wool equal, not too soft nor too hard, then place the fingers of the patient's hand; lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the patient's hand.
and other attendants hold the patient's head so he does not move down; the shoulder comes back to its place now, and if you see that you are repositioning it in this way:
and that you make someone larger than the patient be present; and it should be straight towards the patient's side, and push the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift up the armpit so that the patient hangs in the air; and another attendant pulls the patient's hand down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, he can hold with him something heavy, and the dislocation will come back now.
And reposition it in another way:
and that's when you put a long poker in the ground, whose head is as steady as a piston, and not too big or too small; then it should be put under the patient, but so that it has wrapped itself softly above, and the patient is leaning on the long piece of wood;
Then her hand will be extended below on the other side forming, and the jointure will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, so do this cure: take a piece of iron, two hands long and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded so that it may enter deeply under the shoulder blade, according to this form:
then tie it above the head of the fist wrapped so that the fist does not hurt the patient, then place it under the shoulder blade of the patient;
and extend your arm above the fist of length, and tie the aid above the fist, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on top of one shoulder blade of width, and let the hands go down below, and leave the body hanging from the other side: The joint comes together now.
And when it is returned, in whatever way that may be, then it is necessary that you put below the socket a ball of wool evenly, then apply the poultice around with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all the shoulder and around, then strain below the socket gently, and turn the cloth on the poultice, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he be patient a little while until the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then be patient again after three days or seven, and move him; and if he is stiff and has not been softened, it is sound.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three places, as is written before this chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this and he slips after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is torn or stretched or loosened. and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the chest, or shoulders, or back, is caused by impulse and stretching of hands, and another instrument is administered.
and heal so long as he is sound.
And if after the healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take many baths until that swelling is alleviated and the member returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated to points, and to points it returns;
and it has dislocated in all parts, and even before and behind, and the dislocation is not set right, for one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the sick person's shoulder with the skin, so you can see it plainly. Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as the swelling comes to life, for if the swelling came to life, it would be hard to reset.
and by chance it cannot be completely set right, even when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes greater pain, and by chance many die.
And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you stretch his hand with your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut around, above, and below, and bind the joint to his buttocks together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and pushes it to the root of the palm onto the shoulder that is out of place.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong stretching;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm and hold it firmly, so that it does not move with the stretching;
then turn the arm on each side, then having wrapped a double fold long and wide around it;
and when the nurse has bound the joint to her hand, she anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then binds the joint firmly, until it returns;
and when it is in place, then applies dry powder with some egg white, and binds it firmly, and bends the arm to the patient's neck, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the ligament and let it.
And if you see that the joint does not bind well, then reapply the poultice and the ligament, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set. Then release it.
And if he feels stiffness after the realignment of the joint, and it becomes swollen, then bathe it well and massage it gently, and press until it is relieved. Or you put a layer of fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into water. and when he sweats, then massage the joint temperately, then put the wool back on, and then enter into water. and do thus two or three times, until it is healed.
and if you see, put a cloth soaked in warm cow's milk with butter on top;
so it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joints of the hand are dislocated, and the swelling is light, more so than in other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same way that it is dislocated, as long as the swelling is hot or an abscess comes forth.
And the remedy is that you put the ailing hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of your hand, and place the palm of your hand so that it meets the appearance of the jointure, and press down until it recovers.
However, it is necessary for you to check if it is well in place; then put the patient's hand on a table at the extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back on their hand on the table, and the doctor puts their hand on that appearance of the jointure.
If she returns now, it's well. Unless, if the strain of soothing ointments calms abscesses thus, and it is left in this way without recommencing.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted.
and nothing harms the patient except until the hand is softened, and cannot strain anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries;
if there is no other remedy except to strain through burning by case, and it may not be worth anything by chance.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then strain and leave it for five days, then displace and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, apply warm water to it, and rub it until it is sound.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the tendons of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or stomach;
Then the tendon is set and push the dislocation into your pockets as much as it retracts, then support the head of the tendon and draw it towards the part where it is detached;
and leave it for two days, then set it even on that day;
and tie the nut with what we said, and loosen the joint of a day, and make it move, and re-tie the nut;
and do this often until it is straight, and also do so if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it just as you did before, until it is healed;
and also do this when it is dislocated on the other side.
and treatment of the hump on the back
When the hump on the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations occur without one's will, nor can they be held, and many times a certain member, or both breasts, or two arms, or one is softened.
And often the shin bone moves into four parts;
the one that moves in back is called "gilbositez";
the cure is that you reward if the goutiness has come from childhood: if there isn't any cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the old ways of curing say great things through big words, but there is little profit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the goutiness that comes before the stomach, there is no remedy nor health;
and also that which comes straightly in both sides, and one cannot cure fevers except for that which comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in one equal place and have some strain under him, so he does not get hurt;
Then drive the iron spike into the ground firmly, and another to the feet, and bind a cord between the straps of the patient, and another to the thighs, and knees, and ankles.
and two assistants know the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron spikes.
and be well closed, the spike as we have said, and the physicians put their palms on the spine firmly, until it relents.
And if it does not relent with this treatment, take a board three arm-lengths long, and hollow out the bottom of it, and the patient lies on his side, and push the top of the board under the back, then place the middle of the board on the spine. and the physicians put their feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it relents to its place.
and if you see, make him do it to the one who turns at the hand. and you make two blisters on the head of the patient's great arm, and towards the feet two others, with a hand's breadth between each blister, one above the other.
and have in each blister one pore, where the worm runs through, and let the blisters be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move.
and between each two blisters be one blister turning, on which the worms turn, and have in the two turnings two small blisters a hand's breadth long, to turn the worm;
and then tie the cord that is between the knots to the worm going towards the head, and the other cord to the other knot at the foot, and each of the servants turns his worm along the entire cord, and the master makes it even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, so put on desiccating plaster with abundance of egg white, and then bind, and then apply an ointment from a tablet of three inches long that procures the place of gibbosity and the part of the spine to be whole, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient, until he is well.
and if nothing comes to the end of the health, it is necessary to administer soothing and easing medications, with the ointment that we have said above. and sometimes one administers a piece of linseed, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and that is the bone which opens, why one should not have presumption about it: by chance would death come.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come forth except with dislocations alone, nor does it come so with other joints.
and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four parts: within and without, and before and behind;
and further within than that, and pulled dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the diseased leg to the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee sticks out more than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot double their knee in fire; and it is the leg that is under swollen apostemal heat, because the head of the groin comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it happens on the outside is that this accident is contrary to those before.
The signs of one who has this condition before him are that he is well proportioned in his leg according to completion. Everywhere, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells with anger, and when he goes, it passes above the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in back is that he cannot spread his kneecap, nor double it, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and is the head of the hip at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you should treat if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its condition, and there is no care. and it is not necessary that he have presumptuousness.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, then hasten to return the joint, and stretch inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. by chance if it will return, and there is no need for another care.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you appear the minister strong, and strengthen the leg by two hands, or by one ligament that is tied above the knee. and another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft ligament above the hip. and another pulls the end of the ligament.
and they stretch it up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, just as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to make an incision according to its likeness.
When the dislocation is in the hip-joint, then it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the ligament above the root of the hip, and the end which is below the angle, then stretch the ligament upwards towards the angle, and towards the femur.
Then take another assistants' arms, and embrace the thick part of the ailing person's hip, and stretch it forward firmly: so it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two legs of the patient together with a soft strap on the two heels and on the two knees, and let the sick leg be stretched two doits more than the others;
then it should be suspended from the top of a beam, and be above the ground two arms long;
then instruct the assistant to embrace the head of the hip, and have another assistant holding with the patient, who should hold firmly the hip, because the joints are returning quickly now.
And when the dislocation is in the back, then lie down the patient, just as we have said in the case of gilboesitey, and stretch out the cloth above the afflicted leg properly, and also above the pelvis.
Then put two spits, one at the head and the other at the hips, then insert the spit between the patient's thighs in the shape. and have damp cloths wrapped around, so that the patient does not bleed, then stretch each attendant towards him, and place the mirror next to his hand on the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, put it on the table, and press it thus as we have said in gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, then it is necessary to extend the afflicted leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the mirror so that it is on top of the afflicted knee, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the kneecap.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not need to stretch out the patient downwards or lift them up towards the earth, but rather should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on two hips. and be on their face, and the strap should be stretched as we have said before, and must not press on the joint at the table; and it will be in place when the patient stretches out their legs, and they will be equal. then adjust the hips, and apply the poultice, and strain it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. and if he rests for three days or four, then loosen it, and apply the poultice on top;
and if you see that they are equal, then strain it again, as before, and leave it for three days;
then loosen it, and let it go gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The joints are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inwardly and outwardly, and backward.
and it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their hip, and if it does not bend at the hip, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit up straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and place their foot on your feet.
then take their kneecap between your palms, and draw it inwards between your two arms, then bend the two sides of the kneecap sharply. and another minister stretches their foot until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends slightly at the hip.
and put on the poultice, and make the leg rest at the hip, and tie it together tightly for three days or four, then loosen it;
and do not bother the patient to walk until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limb is not in place, strong extension should be administered, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tend before the part where it is dislocated:
the return is lighter, and one should stretch it lightly with his hands when he is only slightly stretched.
And when it is dislocated entirely, then you should make the patient sit upright, and hold him tight with one minister only by the leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot to you at your right hand, and then to your left two times, then stretch it upwards, and pull the foot well up;
and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, it's well;
but if not, then start the work again, for it will return;
and if it can't return like that, make the patient sit on the ground with their back to the earth, and place one leg firmly on the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around so the patient doesn't hurt;
then take hold of the leg, and another attendant should stretch out the foot to their hands or to the binding strap that ties around the ankle; then each attendant should stretch equally, and the straps should be there between the patient's thighs to hold the patient in place when one is stretching;
then put the fingers equally on the dislocation at their hands, and another attendant should take hold of the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is fixed in place, then put the poultice and bandages on top, and bind firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so that the ligament is not too tight.
then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligament swells, then bind.
then release it on the fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for four days. and if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if the abscess bursts forth, it is necessary to lance it, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
you must When the joints are dislocated, you should gently stretch them without effort, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or heel of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a plain floor or on a level table exactly straight, and place your foot on what appears to be this joint, then press firmly with your foot until it is restored.
and when it is equal and there is nothing appearing, so put a two-legged table under the sole of the foot, then strain them strongly, and leave it for three days, then release. and make it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and one seeks to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not modest in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and tardy, nor too bold;
and start with gentle soothing things on the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the abscess may come to life;
and when the limb is at rest, administer soothing things to abscesses hot, and treat the wound as it should be, with ointments dried.
and if there is a breakage with dislocation, and small bones separated, set them and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this brings harm according to your Creator, and for the strength of your arm and body.
