Here is the translation of the text: And it has come to me in a vision that I must complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and has been entirely lost everywhere, so the knowledge is perished and decayed, and nothing remains except for small descriptions in old books that have been moved by hand. And from this has come the error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is estranged the knowledge.
It seems to me that I will revivify together the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. and I will come together the forms of surgical instruments and other tools with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for them, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the justice of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons and the number of vertebrae, and the behavior and moving and resting muscles, and from the source of their origin.
And so says Hippocrates that the name with its name is much, and with work is little. and similarly in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously said should beware lest he err and kill people.
in such a way that I have often seen many of those who meddle with this science and then abandon their science and sense experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut out the abscess of scrofula from a woman's neck and cut the arteries of the neck. Why so much blood came out that the woman fell dead between her hands.
And he saw another surgeon who treated a stone from an old man's body, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew that he would die if it was not removed.
And he saw another surgeon who treated a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage was a wound;
and the surgeons, full of ignorance, set the break on top of the wound with great haste, and did not leave any padding at all, and left it like that until the end.
and he commanded that it should not be undone.
and it remained like that until the leg was completely inflamed and the toes came to ruin.
I am summoned to come to him, and I hurry to come to untie his leg. and when I loosened it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
But in any case the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until all the members were entirely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who opened up an inflamed abscess and then inflamed it even more through the wickedness of his procedure.
For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that everything that is corrupt can be removed.
And therefore, dear son, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many circumstances;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Why it is necessary for you to beware of them, so that the foolish talker may not speak ill of you.
Take your arms in consent, and begin treating your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through God's favor you come to salvation and be praised.
and let the frightening diseases of grievous sicknesses;
and put away your arms from whatever makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come to this world to the other of glory.
Galens says in some of his admonitions: Take not to heart a bad disease, unless you are called foolish physician.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and medical cauterizations by water, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet.
and of the shapes of instruments, and of the sharpening of cauterizers, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bandages and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and it is about the organization and forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is ordered by the order of bones from head to feet, and forms of instruments.
Therefore, in order that we remember our work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid and the harm caused is a longer and subtler speech and secret response.
and many wise people spoke about this and agreed with it;
and I was satisfied with their words, for I feared the length.
I say that fire cauterization helps universally to all conditions or matters, except two complexions: It is to know hot complexions with material causes, and dry complexions with material causes.
In a hot and dry complexion together with material, they devised nothing and said that cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cautery is not worth for disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not at all be cured by heat or dryness;
and he who said the opposite says that cautery does great aid for hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true some time through experience.
And in any case, do not meddle with fire except by him who has tried it, and who knows through long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the surprises and pace of time;
We are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on cauterization.
And know, son, that cauterization together with fire is a secret of cures, and of greater good than burning cauterization.
For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is burned, and does no harm to any other member if one does not name.
Burning medicines come from member to member by drawing near, and cause the afflicted member to suffer grievous sanitation; and by chance kill the patient.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless there is excessiveness.
And I have found this through experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and therefore I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me that I take away the secret which is contained in fire and the quality of work, as to how it resists the diseases of bodies, just as philosophers say by demonstrating; Receive him in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm ensuing is thus placed under the aid of cauterization. and similarly, if cauterizations are done for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait until greater harm may come to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return. and they say thus;
and they say thus; but it is not as they think, because cauterization is no more than a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than any other medicine for its hastiness and virtue in its work and operation.
And it is possible that the patient's illness comes at some time according to the patient's complexion and the location of the disease and its virtue;
and excesses are accumulated in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless it is that cauterizations are administered to him at the right time when he has excess fat and moisture, just as cauterizations for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizations are effective after medicine, but their intention is false, and it is because cauterizations are the last resort of medicine in that when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they are not effective, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective.
Therefore it is clear that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancient ones said that cauteries made from an instrument of gold are more soothing than those made from iron, and they did not say this for any other reason than the quality of the gold and its high substance.
and said that the burning of a cautery does not cause harm, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true for some men.
and gold cauteries are more soothing than iron ones, as they said. And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know when it's hot because of the color of the gold, and it quickly cools down.
and if you heat it too much; so they become like fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Now I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be more easy to find.
These cauterizations are worth for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two ways to do this because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pain in the dens and pain in the throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The shape of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, moderating the head in the third degree or fourth degree, according to what the virtues and the age and the habit of the patient can endure. and then make him reposition his head.
And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands and put his hands on his chest.
afterwards place the tip of your thumb on the root of his nose between his two eyes. and let it bleed until it becomes scarlet then cauterize the "olivary" which is its form. And place it on the sign marked with ink and make a motion of pulling and pushing your hand little by little while turning. then lift your hand slightly and withdraw the lever as soon as you see the bone a little. and if you do not see it, then reapply the cautery until you see the bone just as I have told you.
afterwards take some pitch, and put it in a warm and soft cotton cloth inside, and place it on the area, and let it be for three days.
After putting a moistened linen cloth on butter; and let it stay until the boil is removed. After treating the wound of the anointing which is called "tetrafarmac", until it is healed.
And the old men say that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more. and therefore it should be helped this way.
And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then take off what has been burned from the bone, and be healed.
And the others say that one should burn it with a cautery as long on top, and push so hard that one reaches the bone as wide as the needle that women put in their purses so that the humors may be moved out.
and one should leave the wound open for a long time. After that, one should treat and bind it.
And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to be good in all cases, except for some men where there is a way of fear.
and it seems to me that I must leave it;
for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other members;
and likewise when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of a cautery is more safe and gentle for me, and from that I work in such a way as to bring forth salvation.
When in all the head comes chronic pain and lasts a long time, then the patient should use year's and pills which are called "cochie", and remedies for purging the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cautery as we have said before, and it does not work. Take care that the head of the patient is strong by nature, and is not too cold; then cauterize below that one as we have said above. After make fire cauterization on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cauterization at the place which is called "vessel". and it is the place where you put poultices; and lift your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
of the head's cautery When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease extends as far as the eye, and the wound is cleansed by gentle medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and yet none of this helps: Then one performs cauterizations in two manners, namely by medical opinion and with fire.
The cautery of medical opinion is that you take a piece of alum, remove the bark and shape it into two small pieces, and then make an incision on the temple where the pain occurs in such a way that you can place the piece of alum under the skin.
and when it is placed, if it adheres well and is restrained tightly, leave it like that for twelve hours; and then loosen it and treat the wound with oil of garlic, and let the wound be like that for two days or three. then put a poultice made from butter so that it protrudes above.
After the treatment of ointment as long as it is healed;
and if you see that this does not help, make use of some burning medicines that I have written about or to treat burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery to its form.
It is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clove or it has a little curvature, and in the middle there is a small prominence.
and places it on the painful spot, and holds one's hand and gently turns the fire so that half of the arrow shaft is burned.
and lift your hand when the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let out a profusion of blood.
After that, place cotton in a linen cloth, and put it on the spot for three days. then place dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
and if you want to cauterize this headache with the "cultellare" cautery, at all the points, and take care not to touch the artery in this headache which is not very old.
of migraine
When you cure a migraine as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauterization mentioned earlier in medicine and fire is not sufficient, then you should reheat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
and then sign above the aching spot a line of about half a thumb's length in width, and withdraw your hand once, and strain yourself so as not to touch the artery and not venture too close to the bone;
and beware of the jaw that becomes numb when eating, and let the nerve have regard only for the numbness and let spasms not come to the patient, and beware of the hemorrhage of blood from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially in one who does not know what is happening, and who is not studied and experienced; and let the work proceed in my way;
but I will tell you how to stop blood flow when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the head just as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter of removing an artery, with the cauterizer who has two knives; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears due to cold
When pain comes from the ear due to cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat up this cauterizing iron called "poins" in the following form:
After pierce all around the ailing ear, or around both if the pain is held in both, and move back about an inch from the root of the ear since you have marked the place to begin. and has X points around each ear;
after the wound has healed.
of the torment of the mouth
The torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that are caused by flux, as we have said in the divisions of disease;
and do not perform cauterization on similar cases that come from diarrhea and menstrual spasms.
When you cure this likeness of torture that comes from yellow bile and purgations of the head and gargling, and it does not take hold, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a bit behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cauterization in the part that appears to be sound, and make it cauterize near the top of the ear above a bit below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple just as long as an inch; and leave the cautery so long as the middle of the wound is burned.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the sword-cut that we have placed beforehand, but it is a bit more subtle and should be with the swords being a bit larger;
after the treatment let it be so as I said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it in the way we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
Give the patient great bunches and powder-filled pills for the brain.
After that, apply to the entire head of the patient, and place on the back of the skull an ointment of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices.
and this is the method of the fire cautery: as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not healed, make three cauterizations within the head from above to below, and have a space of two inches between each cauterization.
and treat him as the others, and if you see him getting worse, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle. and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat him until he is healed.
and let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be.
It is necessary that the head should be cleansed of years and of what we have said before.
after washing the patient's head, then apply cauterization to the head and on each horn, and afterwards and three times on the spine of the neck.
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back. and let it stay until the most of the blackened flesh is burned, and lift your hand. after the wound has healed, and let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be, as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is fitting to first cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot suffer it, then apply gargling and mouth washing to cleanse the brain often with good meat.
after the king's chief one hundred is made, and then the fire cautery is done according to what we have said before, and the fire cautery on the thigh, and on each horn; and if the patient is far and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olive-colored according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
When due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities or moists are corrupted and thick phlegm is produced, then make those cauterizations as we have said to one who has paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which his brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
After the king's chief of the patient; then make a tourniquet of well-made linen, like a circle, and put it in the head;
and have the patient sit crossed-legged, and be well held from all sides;
then present the linenment, and value measures of old buttermilk of he-goats; and let it be heated by fire temperately, so that the skin can bear being poured on it; after emptying the circle from inside to the head, and let it cool;
and do this with the patient once a week for as long as they are healthy.
Or if you see that it is necessary to cauterize elsewhere, making several points on the entire cautery.
This manner of cauterization moistens the brain equally;
and then put on a wet cotton cloth in butter and goose grease.
of the inflammation of the eyes When inflammation comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and keep him from all moistures, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting.
After instructing him to put his head back, and having him cauterized on the head, and having two cauterizations on both temples if the descending [of blood] is at both eyes together, or in one if it is in one.
and close all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple.
and take care not to bleed too much, and if you see a lot of blood coming out, then stop it with all your might.
And I will teach you how to extract arteries and perform a cautious incision, and how to stretch it.
and sometimes one makes a cauterization or ablation between the two bones behind.
and one sees that it is cold, damp excessiveness, then one makes the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of this art going down to the eyes: One cauterizes in the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or ablations between the two bones. and if it is necessary more, then one cauterizes a slight bleeding above the scalp for every little cauterization.
When you apply medicine as we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give the patient three handfuls of vinegar. After the king's head, and make a fire cauterization or olive oil cauterization. and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, one little below the hair.
and beware of the artery so that you do not cover it.
And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this iron called "olivary". to its form.
And if you see, make two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrow hairs are.
and do not leave your hand until one third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points at the oil Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyelids is converted to pus, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: This is to know of fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your care; after drawing on paper the shape of the eyes like a fir tree leaf, and making the beginning of the sign below the hairs;
then put moistened cotton in egg white and powdered marshmallow on the eye, then heat the cautery to its form:
After cauterizing on the shape you drew, a little and a little more times, until the skin is burned in that place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye.
then lift up your hand and leave it thus for three days, then put a moistened cotton cloth in butter as long as the swelling is removed. after the ointment treatment until they are healed.
And if after this the hairs come and the paper is softened then restart the fire cauterization on the same spot just as you did first.
and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural height and is even, and the hairs do not prick at the eye.
The burning cauterization of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and live coal, each one a third of an ounce, and grind them together well; and make it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like a leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper eyes; and if the disease is held only in one eye, then one should operate on that one, and similarly for both; and put wet cotton underneath the eye;
and the patient's head should be in your hand and show you the pain on the medicine, and press it gently every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for he feels the stinging as if it were fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your hand. And when the stinging sensation has passed, then lift up the lead of awe, and return it to its original position if you see the paper lifted up similarly as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.
But if not, then apply more medicine to the place or where the medicine is ineffective, until your works are equal and your eyes are in order.
then put on dampened cotton in a ball until the red color is gone, after treating the joint with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work so that you do not make a mistake in the eyes of those skilled in medicine.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hair pricks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that place which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before. after treatment until it is healed;
and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to how they are constrained;
and let not the right way be denied to him who is studying this art.
This seems to be a heading or title for a section on the treatment of fistulas using cauterization.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this manner.
instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor will he leave his head;
then put a moist cloth in the yolk of an egg or in the juice of pomegranate on the eye;
after that, warm the fire-cautery which is there:
and shape it like a hen's feather on the head, together with the cautery;
if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
but all the same, this which is shaped is not worth much for your work.
After pressing the fistula is open, and bringing out the purulence, and the dryness; and if it is closed, then work on it, and bring forth the pus.
After put hot cautery on it strongly, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part above the nose, so that your hands do not act foolishly. and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, then it would be good. If not, then restart the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and let it be for three days.
After I put on a moistened cotton in butter, and the ointment of drying so long as it is sound, and if forty days pass without being sound, then I put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered. and the king according to what would come in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. You understand a fistula, and open the way; after put in the incision a subtle cane of which is the form: and make it to the quantity of one quarter of an ell; and hold your hand or cane firmly, and do not let the patient move until the poultice has been poured onto it;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's oil a moist cloth in a basin of eggs or in water:
the poultice soars out the way of the fistula, and the sore is cured by marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to make a perforation in the needle, and bring back the fistula to its natural place according to what is fitting for each joint.
This seems to be a heading or title for a section on cracks in lips. Many times occur cracks in lips that are called "piles", and indeed in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing tool according to this form:
And put it hastily into those crevices until it becomes full;
after cure the place with cerote until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the jaw or in the uvea or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made putridity and stink and is enveloped and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit. then it is necessary that you make the fire cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the boil or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes white-hot at the point you are treating, and in the last place;
and do it thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until he is healed.
and if he is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then place the patient's head on your own. after burn the cautery in such a way that its form will come there after, just as you would put a pipe on a tooth;
and put hot hastenings inside the cautery, and hold your hand there until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lift up your hand and start the cautery again as you please;
after fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let them hold it for an hour and richly bleed.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are now confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
Of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, whether it is hot or cold, and medicines do not help, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it into a copper or earthen bowl; Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a thread, and soak it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and keep it there until it cools down.
And thus do this often until the virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are in butter when cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and then put hot iron there until the fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
The cauteries together with fire are such that you take a piece of iron or earthenware, and it should be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient.
After cauterization, the form will come forth hereafter, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Make it often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in the swelling of that cautery, and then rinses afterwards.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And do cauterization on whatever head you want, and according to what you are able.
and this is the form of the blister:
of scrofulae When the scrofulas are of yellow and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then cauterize the head with a cautery such that the form comes forth hereafter, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the other part.
and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and apply a damp cotton cloth with butter until the blister is removed;
after healing, the limb of ointments and tents until it is sound.
When moisture prevails over the pores of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines;
then apply a cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to come close to the throat, and don't burn too fiercely but just slightly.
After which we do another fire cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauter that is called "clavicle" by which we have the form before.
and heal the place as we said before until it be healed.
When all and every disease of the kidneys is due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old illness, then make two cauterizations on the gallbladder in the groin. and another cautery between the breasts under the breast.
and let the cauter that is called "clavicle" be according to the form that was said before.
And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all the cauter that is called "point" because of which the form is as before in the disease of the ears.
and let the points be up to thirty, or as many as around.
After curing the limb according to what is said before, and let the fire cauterize at three times according to this form:
And because of that the cauterizer is lighter, because you make three in one go.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then instruct the patient to lie on their back and on their flank. then lift the key that is inside the tickle on the back of your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the fire cauterization which has two needles of equal size in this form:
and cauterize the key until it is pierced up to the flank, and the figure of the cauterization will be together with four cauterizations.
and therefore it is done with the cauterization which has three needles, because the figure of the cauterization will be six cauterizations.
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cauterization which has three needles:
And sometimes it is applied on one nerve, for which there are eight cauterizers.
After setting above the fire cautery, powder broom with silk. After making the patient rest, and let not move the members for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little else happens then, so make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterizing nail or many cauterizations that are pricking.
For the joint is closed, and dryness has been removed, and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach, as long as they bring it back to its natural state, and multiple cathartics occur in him, and accustomed remedies are tried but do not help, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, stretch out his legs and arms. Then make three fires on the lower back near the kidneys to the size of a hen's egg, with each fire nail-like, and two fires outside the two sides so that the shape of the fires is at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they will generate putrefaction.
and be the fires so deep that they penetrate the two parts of the vertebra, and be the shape of the fires according to this form without adjustment.
And if you see it necessary to cauterize a large fire in the stomach according to this form;
and whoever has fear of this fire, cauterize in piercing and sign above the stomach in one point according to the quantity that you see fit; then the cauterizer must perform the entire fire cautery which is called "poins".
After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until he is healed.
When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and excessive windy-ness, so much that it is greatly disturbed from its natural complexion by excesses. and the patient is cured from what we have said in divisions, and it does not help him, so then the patient must be put on a diet of his habit. and sign of applying three fire cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, to remove the hypochondria, there where the ribs of man come.
and let there be an interval of the size of a dove between each cauterization. and the cauterizations should be on the length of the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cauterization.
And let it burn just to the middle of the key, and let the patient stand straight on his feet.
and if he cannot, then sit, stretch out his legs, and lift up his knees.
And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries with the cutlery, if you are subtle and skilled in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the key, for you would dry out the whole body. and let it come just to boiling, for the keys are very subtle there at that spot, and you know for certain.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the gallbladder: if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels pain not too strong.
and if he is in a sling, so does he feel unrelenting pain.
And then when this treatment was being done by the physicians, it was necessary that the patient be laid down on his back;
and then place a signet over the location where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, of which this is the form: and cauterize the cautery so that the burns are scorched, and come just short of being seared, so that the purulence is entirely consumed;
after the treatment according to the treatment of ulcers until he is healed;
and it is not necessary that this cautery be used by anyone except he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Then he can boldly work, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
Of the cauterization of pleurisy
The ancient ones say that one should make many cauteries with the roots of aristologe, and in this manner: Take a long aristology root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as it should be. And anoint the root with oil, and hold it in the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the throat and the neck, and two small cauterizations a little below in the part that is under the beard.
and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind. and one cauterization in the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two on the ribs of the breast outside the cauterization that is between two shoulders.
and do not press your hand at all, but make it open just as when you smell.
And they say that some old person uses the fire cauterization to make something similar to a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess. and pain flees from the wound, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not help, then there are three manners of cauterization that are all good.
From which one manner is this, that you make three or four cauterizations, in lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before.
and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be mindful over his back;
and another manner of cauterization is that you scrape the one that has two nodules, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the knife that is near the mouse, or where the patient's skin comes towards the left, and be the elevations which you lift the knife according to the knife, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
After I put the two nerves on fire so that the scars can be seen from the other side, and then draw the fire cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, burn the entire cautery to three nerves.
After the healing when it has taken long time, and this is worth more than the other remedies previously mentioned.
The cautery does not work on dropsy, except by the method called "asclytes".
When you treat him according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast. and the cauterizations should be well near the edge of the bone that is hard.
After leave the cauterization open for a long time to make it purify, and do not cease the treatment of the patient after the cauterization. and healing would hasten, and there would be together two intentions with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the nail that we have shown before. and this one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what has been set forth before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the wristbone and the ringbone. and lift your hand with the cautery so as not to turn.
And do not enter too far inwardly, thus fierce citrines may arise, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Then do two cauterizations on each leg, one in each leg at the tip of the wristbone. and the long cauterization is one under the kneecap in front and another behind it, midway down the leg.
and leave the cauterizations open for a long time until the pus issues out.
After the treatment of other treatments we have said.
When a bloating of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering and of great virtue, if then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken here before about the stomach cautery, at the belly cautery; and four cauteries around the mouth subtle to every subtle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cauterization on the armpit, and one cauterization on each side, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are ancient and are of great cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, if make cauteries: On top of the spine of the back, that which is entirely beneath the almond-shaped skin, and two cautionary marks below the mouth.
And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat not cooked, and one sees the face swell, then on the stomach make a great cautionary mark as before said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen to all the cautionary marks. and leave the cautionary mark open for a long time. After the cure, let the wound be until it is healed.
When you cut at all places, if you scrape the cautionary mark that seems to be red, and then put it altogether on the place cut. and leave your hand there until the cautionary marks come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood will not flow.
do this once or twice, and if there is much of it, then cauterize each one as we have said. After the cures of ointments benefiting as long as they are unsoiled;
and if you cauterize with a great fire on alum, then it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When a fistula comes and is inflamed and discharges foul matter and corrupted moisture, then you should carefully examine the whole tent [tentorium] and know exactly how deep it is.
After scorch the cauter that seems rough, and plug it into the fistula according to the quantity of matter that has entered, and restart the cauterization until those corrupted parts are burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to the amount of need.
and beware of burning the nerves that are inflamed, and the great veins.
if the fistula goes to the bladder and into the intestine, then beware of these places, and do not make fires except on burned flesh, and think that it is not a punishment.
after curing the wound as long as it is unsoiled, and if the wound is sealed, and the matters are removed after a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed.
and if the materials are not removed, know that the bone is too much and corrupted at the site; and thus as one of those which we will say in its place.
When pain of cold comes to the joints from rain and great windiness, and does not take shape like a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cauterization on both sides of the joint, as we have previously said.
and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a row, and they will make greater aid.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cauterization on the part behind the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cauterization should be as long as the nose of a pea.
and do the fire cautery behind the back, or wherever you may need it;
and let the cauteries be nails according to the form said before.
When the mares are cold and moist, and do not cease to conceive for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is late; and when they come, it causes great pain; then it is necessary to do three cauterizations around the mouth, just as we have said in the burning of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back;
and let the cauterizations be nails, just as we have said.
When the viscid moisture descends to the root of the groin, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and it is found that the point of departure is in the view, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the base of the groin to the fire cautery similar to a circle, and mark before the point around the base as it turns, so that the base be within the circle.
and if the cauteries are such as those of which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, make three large ones on the olivaire, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the keys.
and cure him until he is healed.
Of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the groin of the loins, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: Then it is necessary to purge the patient of large foul humors or other similar pills. Afterward, do a fire cautery;
and the method of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to know, hot medicines together and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is according to many manners, one of which is such:
that you cauterize on the back of the hand three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make a good depth and width, and have between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and be the cauterizations olive-sized.
Sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the top of the hand, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then do a cauterization at the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hand;
But make it in such a way that the circles contain all the hairline, and all the specks of gold are burned.
And that is the way one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the groin and does not reach as far as the hip nor as far as the leg.
And if it comes just to the hip and leg, make two cauterizations there where the patient says the pain holds him, and one cauterization above the ankle four days later, on the left side somewhat.
and make the cautery with a cleft-iron, and burn the specks of gold.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two inches below the foot or almost there, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery called "points". And if necessary is, make it more for him.
and if he knows that the pain is under the kneecap towards the hip, then make a cauterization with a cleft-iron or circularly, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave it until you burn the nerves and great arteries, and do not cause more distress and contraction for the patient.
And I myself have seen many who had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they were left so that the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted all over the feet. After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, do a fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And the sages say in the fire cautery of the groin, that is how it should be done, make such a fire and let it be as big as a hazelnut or a little less, and it should be between the bones and should be so far apart as the width of a pea.
And let the spaces between be two fingers wide, and also like beans, and it should have a good layer of iron well made.
and that is the shape:
And be heated until it is all red and smells sweet, and then put it on top of the boil on the sick patient's groin, and be turned so as to lie on the healthy side.
and let the cautery be done once the fire is removed and leave it three days; and then apply butter ointment, and leave the wound open for a long time; After the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says that we should use little of this cautery due to the fear of his gaze, and if we see few who use it;
and yet these are good cauterizations that can be borne by him, and the place where he is affected.
The cauterization of burning medicine is that you make an instrument to enter between the edges of the opening, and be made of clay or iron with a length of one pace, and in the height have two notches, and between each notch have the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and be open at both ends and above, and join together as this form:
Then place the poultice of henbane on the patient lying on their side, and afterwards place your hand above the poultice of henbane; After pouring hot water between the two circles of the awn heated by fire one pot, and leaving it an hour's time, and allowing the patient to suffer heat and burning from it.
For there is also a cauterization like fire;
And when the cauterization is past, take up your instrument and raise the sweet water and let it be thus for three days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scorching is removed. and leave it for three days so that purging ensues;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as long as he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the hip or leg, make the instrument that holds water according to what you have done in a similar way.
and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and hot water, equal parts of each, and grind them together, and put it in a new pot. where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter;
where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter; and put it in another pot well weighted down, and put on alkali and heat and warm water above, so that there are two above the powders and you will have it well prepared in your hand;
and let it be thus until the warm water and heat descend into the weighted-down pot, then take all that warm water and pour it on heat and alkali as before.
And then it will be very hot and is administered in the form of medical works and cauterizations of other limbs.
For it works like fire, and also with other medicines such as tar, and honey mixed with anacardium and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us about a treatment where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and greatly praised it, saying that no other treatment was done, and he was healed only once when this treatment was performed, and he bathed himself just as he teaches hereafter.
And it says to take green lime juice that is fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little bit of fat, and put it on the back, hip, and leg where the pain holds, and bind.
and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel the heat anymore.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warmed up, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away altogether and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery on such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when a vein is cauterized with goat's hair sparks, it helps greatly.
and the cauteries should be done in this manner. Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb and the toe that is called the fossa.
Then take dry goat's hair, and set it on fire until it is coals, and put it on the wool, and let it be until it is extinguished.
and do it again like that, and don't stop doing it until you think with reason that it will come as far as the back, and that the pain is ceased.
and this manner of cauterizing is called "cautere de chievre".
Of the pain from the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive bloodletting, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these similarities are worth cauterization, unless it comes from an infusion of cold material.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be freed from fetid pellets or similar things, and one makes signs on his back, where the pain is, three lines marked with an enche, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and let the cauterization be done according to the "point" cauterization;
and if you see fit, make three or four cauterizations at the cauterizing point in the middle of the nail according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a thin, pale complexion when they wake up, and fear; and you find it in the last vertebra of the back and on the appearance that comes on the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize it at the "celcle" cautery according to this form. So that the fire cautery treats each part of the spine equally.
And if you see that it is necessary to cauterize around the spine with the fire at two or three points, and let the points be close together.
After curing the wound as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in a place of swelling which is near a nerve.
Of the pain of the joints.
When pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot heal it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner:
Make the fire of cauterization around the jointure of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then apply cauterization to all the cauterization we claim "point". And if the pains come to just the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cauterization on each knee three or four times for each part, until the entire olive-shaped cauterization;
and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand away any longer than until the splinters of the charred skin are burned.
And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the knuckle two lines;
and if there is no more pain, then make incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if pains come to the ribs or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance of the patient and provide remedies.
For if you make good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the aid of God.
When a rupture comes in the inguinal region, and the bowels descend to the groin and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see him being cured, he does not eat at all that day; and make him do things that loosen his belly, so that the bile descends from his stomach;
after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are restored, and bring them up to your fingers, and bind them under the rupture above the bone of the arm, and in all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
Then heat the fire cautery to the point where this shape is formed:
so long as it is white and gives off a sweet smell. Then reset the bowels to their place; and the attendants hold out their hands above so they do not return back;
and work well on the patient's hips, and place under him a cushion and a servant above his hips, and another one above the breast who holds hands;
then place the cautery on the sign over your entire hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not hit it at first, so keep going again another time until you reach the bone; and be careful subtly lest the bowel bursts when you do the cautery; lest you burn it; and lest through this the patient does not die or suffer another harm.
And know that when you do not come right to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
And it is necessary that child cauteries be subtle according to their size, and great people also great according to their size;
after three days of treatment, apply the grease from the cauterized area until the scab is removed;
after treating other wounds until they are healed, and the patient lies on his back for 40 days to ensure the wound is well closed;
and it is necessary that his nails be trimmed long ago, so that the skin does not burst when he needs to go into chambers;
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage should be given to him, and it should be worn for another 40 days;
and he should have good rest, not overexert himself, and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting;
and when he does this teaching so he is completely healed.
And I will say next about the cutting treatment in this chapter.
When growths come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then do the fire cautery on the fire according to its quantity, and let the third part of the heart be burned. after the cure according to what we have said;
and no one of the old men has said that you should cauterize at the fire at three angles according to this form:
but mark the first sign at the beginning and draw a line for the width above the ulcer, and another below, and lead your hand through all the cauterized area.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and more fragile.
Of old pain in some member. When pain comes to any member, either from falling or hurting, and that pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cure does not work, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauterization be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and pains.
if he is healed from the first cauterization, it is well;
if it does not help, begin another cauterization on top of the previous one, for some habits are that he must move to the member that is closest to him, therefore it is necessary that you do the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
The joints are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and likewise the disease that comes from the putridity of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you not see it being cauterized, take heed if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then do five cauterizations on the head. I pierce the head at the back, and the other side towards the forehead to the end of the hairline. and I above the two horns, and I behind above the eyebrow ridge;
and I leave as long as the fire cautery comes up to the bone, and so that the skin blisters come out from it in such a way that the vapors of the thick humors can escape;
and I cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.
And if the swelling is everywhere spread out; and it is manifestly broken down, so you must cauterize these cauteries on the head, and one on the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back, and one great on the coccyx and another below, and two on the two shoulders; and it is on the hips, and it is on the tendons of the back, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the lower back, lest you burn them;
and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that when I make more cauteries, I bring about more aid, and my profit increases;
and know that the patient does not feel pain during the cautery as the healthy person does, because their body is already all corrupted.
And it is fitting that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in ways of iron.
Afterward, lay him on a bed of flour with honey and other treatments until he is healed.
When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicine and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
and let the cautery be a little bit entering the space of the cow's hide; then let the doctor of ointments until he is healed.
And at no time has anyone done a cautery on the hand or foot or back at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is removed, the swelling will be gone.
and no one intervenes in this matter unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine does not prevail, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep according to the thickness of the cow's hide, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
then mix the doctor of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of pigeon and blood of crane, each one a part. And let it be sewn together altogether, and tied with a bandage, and left at rest in the same place until it is healed.
the cure for chancre by cauterization
When a chancre comes at the beginning and you wish to arrest it, then cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the tour of the chancre.
And wise men also say that one performs cauterization just as much in the middle of a boil;
and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen some time ago;
and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterization called "circumcision", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When some person has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, very old) and he has little blood, or because of the weather; and you hasten to die: then one must cauterize around it with many small cauteries that prick; afterwards, leave it thus. For it will hurry to die.
And if you see it bursting forth at all the cauterization, then heat the cauterization where there is the shape:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the core, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them externally in just that way that the course of purging be eased.
After he is cured to perfection.
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a wasting away of a member, for it wastes away members just as fire wastes away dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can suffer a fire cauterization together, then shape the cauteries into small and large nails, according to what is needed for the location where the disease is;
afterwards, cauterize all around until you have eradicated all the corruption, and so that nothing remains of it, except for everything that is corrupted to be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the cauterized places that suffer burns with oil until the scorchings of fire are removed, and all corruption.
After the treatment of ointments brings forth flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not form, then it is good;
and if not, then repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
And this remedy is sometimes used in place of fire cauterization by medicine alone;
but all the same fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of aegrotic medicine in the division: take what you need when.
of boils that come to the feet Many times it happens that on the feet due to foreign matter a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large abscess that wounds the foot.
And the cautery of this disease is according to two manners. It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is when you sharpen the cautery needle to be as fine as a pen nib, and it should be made of good iron to its measure so that it can pierce through from all sides, and have subtle margins.
afterwards place everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail. and leave it thus for three days until it begins to putrefy; then apply a poultice of wild mallows mashed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the joint with ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted by a wound on the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then you must bring hot water cautery. and it is in such manner: take a piece of bronze or iron, or a needle of vulcanized material, and put it on the nail and the altal, that is to say for wart removals; and put the piece on so that it surrounds all around, then I put a little of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and then let the hot water find its way deep to the root;
and let the patient suffer a little the stinging of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will peel off all its roots.
So that you do an after another, until you have removed all those within the body, then cure the swellings that generate flesh.
When some people shiver from cold or from quartan fever or another, you should make four cauterizations on the spine of their back, one between each spine. and one at the navel, and one above the stomach in the olive-shaped cauterization;
so that it will shiver, and the health of the cold disease will improve.
Sometimes apparent on the skin are baths or pustules that come from great corrupted matters.
so it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule; a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by fire, or of long aristolochous root, or a lenticular cauterization.
And sometimes when you cauterize at the beginning as this manner appears, and they cannot grow forward, but are broken down the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times great bleeding occurs from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the fore, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a member, and similar things. and it is very grievous thing to stem.
And yet whenever this happens to someone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until the blood is stilled under your fingers, and no more drops out.
then put the cauterizers in the fire with olive oil, small and large, until all are red.
then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is routed, and put it on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stemmed.
And if it spouts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery has stopped, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped.
and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is beneath, and that no other harm comes upon the patient;
and know that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot well stop it, even when the artery is large, unless it is through one of the four ways that we have said: or by cauterization, or by extracting it when it is not yet treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medications put on that have the power to stop blood; and be tied and restrained accordingly.
Whoever will cause stanching of blood will bind it tightly with cloths or put hot things on it, or other similar things, unless it does not benefit.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no surgeon or medicine present, then one should put one's two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten with cold water often until the blood is congealed and thickened and hardened.
and make inquiry beforehand about those things that he needs for cauterizing and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all about every disease where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the means, causes, and operations of cauterization.
and I have set that chapter as a preface, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way because one finds more easily what one desires.
And thus as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to embark on folly. For many ways of people come into cures. those who take care of themselves so well with their illness that they die quickly because of the difficulty they find in their disease, and the great severity of their evil. and one should have fear of these.
And there are those who give you their sense, and say: wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful.
It is not fitting for you to consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and seize.
and use divination and indication in the treatment of your sick to bring salvation be converted;
and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Dear friend, may Our Lord give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy spirit of His hand, Amen.
Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I have divided from the beginning just as far as this, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the nurse holds the child's head too tightly.
and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause that one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and among all those I have seen, many die. and therefore it seems to me that I should hasten the work in such cures.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be sustained.
and swelled so much with the moisture that it was dead, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the sphenoid, between the skull and the bone.
and the work is such that if moisture is between the knee and bone, and abscesses are small, then you cut a wide incision in the middle of the head;
and it should be as long as two [of us], as long as the moisture flows;
and see to the shape of the spatula;
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs that the corners of the head are open on each side, and the liquid jumps high when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not respond to you; so it is necessary that you cut three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner;
And after the incision, extract all moisture away. After you have stitched up the incisions with bandages and powders, and put wine and oil in them, and leave it so for five days;
then loosen it, and heal the wound with tents and anointings, and let the head swell equally, and then feed the patient dry meat of pheasant or similar moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens up, and where the water accumulates.
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then at that place where the abscess opens up, and the accumulation of water, and make a cut according to what you can do.
and beware that you don't cut the artery; and then a flood of blood flows, so that the patient may die from the bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to anyone that has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is the fire cautery with which you will cauterize the two arteries.
It is necessary, therefore, when you see them cut open, that the patient put their head back; after he rubs the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull out the patient's neck to the full length of the cloth; Then look at where the vein runs, and the arteries of one side and the other are after the ears, and they are not reunited.
Then mark the arteries with a probe, then cut one and the other with a sharp instrument of two parts, as long as the vein comes to the bone, and so it will be by the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the spatula below the artery and cut above, cutting in the same way as two do across.
And when the vein is cut, then blood springs forth continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark with a probe and make until the bone.
And that which is necessary for the blood to flow forth if it is six inches, and by chance a little more or less, according as the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery.
Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the sycamore, then cut off what becomes abscesses so that none come forth, and stop the wound and tie, and apply ointment to the cure until it is healed.
of migraine When ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in temples and old foreheads and similar things, and it is treated by manners of medical cures and all that does not help him, then we cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient should pull out the hairs from his temples, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, for it beats well by its pulsation, and is rarely responded to except in some men who are too cold.
And if it is responded to, then the patient should bind his neck with some cloths, and rub the joint with a rough cloth, and raise the joint in hot water as long as the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula of which there is the shape: Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then lift it up with tweezers and detach it well from the folds that are below each part.
And if the artery is thin, then turn it at the tip of the needle, and cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers. Because she is not shaped, so does not jump up all at once.
And draw out blood from six vessels up to three.
and if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two loops with a strong double thread of silk, so that no swelling comes before the wound heals, and thus there will be less bleeding.
then trim the surplus that is between the two loops at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the surrounding skin with a burn spatula just to the bone until the flesh is trimmed.
and this is the main work if the patient has no fever and is of a hot temperament. For cauterization is helpful in finishing off moisture: because it is of greater help against moisture.
Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and places well-made tents upon it.
and when you loosen them, take care of dry medicines that bring forth flesh, and of poultices, until they are healed.
and if there is no gap in the artery as long as you are working on it, then hurry to cover it with cauterization, or else take vitriol and strain it through your hand so that the blood is stopped. and if you don't have that present, then place your cloth on the spot so that the blood is frozen, and apply cold water to the area until the bleeding ceases, and strain it as needed.
And there should be a thick space between the two cutlery, and then when you have signed to stop the bleeding from the two spots, and take out the hot iron over it until it comes just up to the bone, and close the vein in two places. and let them be separated between the two bones because they are not joined by this cautery at all.
and that is the form of the cautery:
and what is more effective and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cut into two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to withstand the heat for a longer time. For when the cuttings are too dense, they hold their heat less.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are on the forehead of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit at all from medicine being applied there, and you see the patient's face grow ruddy, and feel a swelling on the forehead as if trembling; and thus the skin is tender and moist so that the hairs of the paper are fallen, and the papers are heated and scalded by the heat of the tears, so there is need for this remedy. And they used to call it the "contused cure", and is that you do behind the patient who has this disease, cutting off the hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
And they used to call it the "contused cure", and is that you do behind the patient who has this disease, cutting off the hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. and let one of the incisions be like two lines all the way to the nose when eating backwards; and the others two on the ribs above the paper, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are on the ribs above the papers.
and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joint.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to absorb the blood, then put the spatula in two parts as is the shape:
from the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the keratin that is between the two incisions to the whole surface that is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. and put the instrument called "culterelle" in the first notch, and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape:
And set the cutting edge towards the fatty part of the flesh to the vein, and the cutting edge soft towards the bone, and hold it so that it comes to the main fissure.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where the key appears, and then make another incision in the middle opening up to the other depth.
and then draw out equal blood, and express the place for the taken blood;
then put a patch of old cotton in each opening, and put wet cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and ale on top, and make sure that abscesses do not come there;
and on the third day, release the bond, and apply a great quantity of cold water, then apply an ointment of basil with rose oil, and other remedies for treating wounds, until it is healed.
When someone comes with acute catarrh accustomedly, and you see the eyes thick and small, and dimming the sight, and burned papers; and the hair falls off, and the top of the head is extremely painful, and the patient is exhausted. therefore learn through these accidents that those matters and the catarrh do not come from many voices, and the father of the disease is there, so it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to place their forehead backwards, then make a great gash in the forehead and another of about equal width. And begin at the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision up to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that stir with hunger;
and when the bone is exposed, then wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then dry between the two lips of the wound and put old linen cloth there, and try to tie it tightly; then bind above with moist cloths in wine and oil, and take care not to get an aposteme hot;
when it is opened, then it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, and then treat with caustics things that make flesh ensnare.
In such a manner: Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of calumba, and make it into a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to draw out the pus entirely.
From the stoppering of ears
All that flows from the ears is one of the four things: or stones, or a piece of iron or similar thing like lead; or seed, such as mustard, broad beans, peas; or flowing things like water and ashes and similar things.
When it pierces the ear or in some other way does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then administer an extraction; and make him sneeze with condiments, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around his ear; and the ear is above.
Many times death comes from this treatment;
and if it does not bring death, then extract with fine forceps, for which there is the shape:
If it jumps out of the forceps, that's good;
if not, then extract with a fine scalpel of small double-edging;
and if it does not jump out by this, then make a thread of iron and plug the chief of the thread or hole in the ear strongly, and block that which is around the thread with wax so that the blood cannot enter with the thread; then treat it strongly, for many times death comes as we have said;
and if it does not come to death in this manner, then take glue of which takes the birds, and put in some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and wrap around it a little piece of cotton; Then press the gall above the stone or whatever it is, and draw forth.
And if she doesn't get better from all the things we have said, then hasten to split open the ear before the abscess comes forth and convulsion.
and the manner of the incision is that you first let the patient's head bleed from the cephalic vein, and draw out the blood according to its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fatty part or dependent area. and make the incision like a crescent moon, as far as you can reach to the stone, then extract it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth.
and treat it until it is healed.
And if there are grains inside and it swells, so administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, so administer the gentle spatula held subtly according to this form: and bring an incision to that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grains are moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have broken them into many pieces;
then extract it with subtle forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In this water that falls in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to frown with condition first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it sit on that ear itself where the water is. If she jumps for that, it's good.
if not, then take many pieces according to the length of your finger should be held and light, and scale them slightly with fire; and put the patient's ear canal or perforation on it, and pierce up into it with the other foot from the other side, and strike another piece above the earring that is in the ear; and do not stop making one stone on top of another until the water flows all out, and thus it jumps all out;
and if you see, take a twig, and tie one end to the ear, and the other end takes fire so much that the thickest part of the twig is burned;
then make another side with other twigs until all the water flows out, just as we said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a hedgehog and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is large-bodied and one can feel it, use extractive force of tweezers; and that is the thing most easily removed which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you have cured as we have said in the division and in treating with distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: If there are no signs of wounds, then treat them with fine tweezers; and if there are none, then take the cord that is around the form:
And be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then tie it tightly around the cord; Do this often until all the threads come out.
And if they do not come out, then stop around the cord with cotton as I said in the stone;
and if they do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the cutting of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations;
and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, as it is around the form that you see: And whether it is of silver or of lead, there are numerous small holes below and many above to distill.
and to press down into the distillation with the well-made lead instrument for this purpose, and if you see that take the file and envelop it around the pointed tip in a cotton cloth. then pour out your oil or juice, and that which you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane be in the ear.
then push down into the file with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or drips from the ear. and the patient feels it inside, and let the distilled substance be heated over fire so that you may distill it in the ear. and beware it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
From the stoppering of ears
No child is born who has no perforation in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through the bursting of a wound or a boil within the ear, and these abscesses sometimes burst deep into the ear so that it cannot be seen.
and sometimes it happens that the perforation opens up and one sees well.
That which bursts deep inside is a serious wound requiring many preparations, and when one sees it, you must put the patient's ear in the sun. and look inside: if you see the pus appearing, then the work is all this time needed for it to be in its proper form:
And cut away and scrape out everything ahead and behind, so that it does not harm the ear;
If the swelling is of new flesh or the cartilage of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and cut it lightly, until that flesh is completely removed.
And if the opilation is done precisely in the ear, take the subtle razor light and heat it slightly on the fire, then put it in the ear canal.
If you feel the swelling that causes the patient to hear grating, pierce lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
Then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian myrrh. Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with red water, and sprinkle powder of vitriol upon it;
and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then take care of him until he is healed.
And if the bleeding stops, then take an sponge and dip it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
These things that come out of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with forceps and tweezers, and scrape off with a spatula from its roots. then place it on a vitriol-soaked cloth.
And if it does not detach, then cauterize with a lenticular subtle fire cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth nothing.
and repeatedly repair them, so that no part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hare Many times come out of the eyes things that seem like gum arabic in their shape and hardness, and because of this this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below the paper. The works are such:
The works are such: Take heed if the swelling goes from one side and to another, and it is a light thing to know;
Then make the incision wide, then scrape off each part lightly, then take it up with forceps and cut.
If you cannot cut it without piercing a little into the paper, it will not cause anything to trouble the patient;
and if the wound is large, then sew it up with a seam, and take care of it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not make any great effort, for the flesh will restore itself shortly and will soon become healthy.
And if the swelling is going down inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn back the paper, take up the swelling with forceps, and cut and press it from one side and the other;
and if the paper is displaced by incision, it does not matter;
and when the pustule is burst, then pour salted water on it and care for the area where the pus gathers until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is discharged onto the papers above, and this happens more often in children than in no one, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have catharrhs in the mornings, and are unable to look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes;
and therefore they lie down on their faces soon, and sleep above, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place at your breast and feel the exinach between.
And the way of working is that the patient puts their head on one's shoulder;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then place it on him; and press at his sides from one part and the other, so that the excess be assembled within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula's edge, cutting an incision of moderate size, and not be any wider than the wound one makes when opening a vein;
and cut through the skin as far as you come to the excess; and in various dispositions comes the excess from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then extract it in one piece of cloth wrapped between your arms at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out;
and beware you don't insert anything into the opening, so you don't come all the way to the very eye, so you don't scar it.
and if the incision does not open in the beginning of the opening, then widen the opening slightly further until it appears.
then pull it as we have said, then moisten the cloths with oil and water, and put them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and put on something to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat it until it is cleansed.
And if an abscess forms at the hot place, then apply poultices soothing them until they are cleansed.
of hairs of paper When paper hairs grow in addition to the natural ones, and they are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and filminess, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes.
and this is the cure according to four ways: or by fire cautery together, or by medicated bath as described in the chapter on cautery, and this is done either by incision and stitching or by caustics, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
If she has converted, it is good; if not, then put an awl through all the thread above; and make it so that the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow beside these hairs is pierced by the needle, and pull the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
then make in the part below the paper, beneath the adjacent hairs, cutting all the scab to the great gash down to the small one.
then pull out the thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign above the paper a figure of wax, like the resin of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see will lift the paper which is divided into all.
And if someone has need, one copes with a great quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is.
Then fill the spatula with all the space above the two lines you have marked, and start with a great ladle just small. and it should be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the key, then scrape all.
then assemble the two lips with a seam of a needle to all the fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make the surplus threads dry on both sides above any sticky things, if you wish to do so.
and if not, then don't bother, and let the seam and threads remain just for three days or four.
then treat the wound without stitching or constraining things, for the paper will heal by the suturing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is tedious (as the ancient said), and it is work without fear; and if otherwise:
and if otherwise: and it is that you sign the paper with a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, three times unsealed according to the form that is here:
then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the things are not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and sew it into the shape; and sew the other thread near the large gutter, and the second thread near the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your two sides;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar balm-like unguents.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted:
if it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of thorns is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make an incision in it according to what I have said, then make two thorns by art, and also two subtle ligaments as long as the parchment and as wide as the spatula is; and tie the two knots of both parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the parchment of oil, and bind the two thorns together in both parts. and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is stretched will die and become black and hard until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the wound becomes inflamed, then treat it until it is healed.
and when the wound is closed, and the scab has fallen off, and they can no longer be pricked by the hair.
and that is the form of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and breadth.
the work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert into it a soft and subtle silk thread. then tie the knots together gently, and let one be as long as the other, with a length of about a palm.
then take another thin thread of silk briefly, and tie the ends of the thread together.
Then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
and let it be done in the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and minute work; then thrust the needle all along the course of the hair next to the root, and make it pierce into the paper quickly as you draw it up over the natural hair.
then pull out the hair up to the course, and thrust that hair into the course if there is one, two, three or more of them.
then pull out your hand so that the hairs come forth all along the course on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the course is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the course down to the bottom of all the thread that you have ordered, until the course comes forth from the opening above and you see it by the sight of the eye.
Then if you pull the bowstring and thread, and close the eye and let it rest for two or three days, until the hair grows back into its place and the skin heals.
And if the hairs are short, accompany the long hair of the natural she-goat, and elevate it with that one which you leave, until it is elongated and then lift it.
of the pouring of oil When this disease called "aleacrati" or the pustule comes to the eye, there are two ways in it.
one natural and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of treatment is that you cut open the abscess, and open up the lips of it, and put linen cloths inside, and bind it until it is healed.
and it is not necessary that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. If you do this, then the illness will come back worse than the first one.
but the work of gentle things, such as fennel. and rose of water or high and flax seed be cooked, and anointing with dyquylon dissolved in some oil, and wrapped in a tent, and the treatment of those.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not putrefy at all according to the form in which it was before.
and these works that we have said are not contrary to the remedies of this illness, so it does not return according to the form in which it was before.
This illness which is beneath, which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and gashing and burning and similar things;
and the way of the operation is that you take a needle with a doubled thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left armpit as far as the right, so that the threads come out in two holes of the flesh.
Then is the skin above the needle all along, and the cut is at the broad spatula. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that's good;
if not, then take the rasp and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits or one inside the paper.
and be the edges of the two slits at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the shape will be like the shape of a letter which has no "I Greek".
then take out that skin, according to the quantity of its edges is worn away below, as much as it ensues from the paper, then stitch together the two severed parts and sew with a thread of linen.
After the treatment of what we have said about soothing medicines, and tents, as long as they are sound.
And if the illness comes from a wound or cut or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a smooth incision beneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what is written above. then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an artifice of every kind so that they can bring back the figure to its natural form.
and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various conditions.
When this suturing has happened to many people in just such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of egg, and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up.
and the stretching is done by pinching, until you grasp what is subtle in the spatiumile, which is not too rough or too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear if it is too rough and blights the eye.
and your incision, which you make in what is assembled, should be made lightly, so that the paper comes back to its natural form.
and all that is assembled is healed, and does not at any time cause saltiness in the water, or the lifting up of sweet water, or anger.
then put a tent made of linen between the paper and the oil, and put wet wool on top of the oil in abundance. and after three days, use the lifting up of anger and things that follow until he is healed.
Know that the finger is according to two manners: She is nervous and resembles a hard boil, and another one that is not at all nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and cooked in pincers, cannot be undone.
And both of these likenesses begin towards the great tear duct, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, then opens their eyes. and lifts the paper to your hand, then coils it like pincers of small double-thread, and stretches it above. then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or cow, or ox, and the strong thread. and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the ulcer, and pierce through to the whole needle, and tie the ulcer with one thread and stretch it above, and scrape away all the hair from the side of the ulcer that comes out and is adjacent to the tear duct up to the top, then cut the remaining part in the root of the tear duct to all the subtle strings and small forces, and leave the natural flesh alone as if the tear duct were not incised, so that the body does not produce tears normally.
and sometimes the finger stays bent only at the knuckle, and on the string, as we have said; then one scrapes away all the soft pummelbone of which this is the form:
And beware that the pummelbone does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the muscle is not pierced;
and after incision pours into the eye a little bit of boiled silk, and from the caldron makes litharge, and leaves it until the next day; then cures all that is needed until they are healed.
And if the finger is not numb, and you cannot thrust the needle in, and the knuckles cannot enter, many times this resemblance of a finger is cured by remedies;
and they grow as I have recounted in the section, and if you see it close, then work on the patient's eye, and take the pummelbone lightly and promptly according to this form: And press the ulcer above subtly, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches quickly, then distill from your mouth to the eye a potion made of litharge and red cinnabar and seal it, and stop the eye until the next day.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as if it were a boil, then pour milk, and first cure the hot apostema until it is healed, then begin again the treatment as before, until it is healed.
Then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the skin of the abscess harms the eye with great harm, then suspend it on the pad, and cut off part but not all, lest a flow of tears occur.
Then distill into the eye a potion made of red cinnabar.
The eyes of some men never show any redness, and cover the pupil and restrain above the papillae and turn it to the outside, and seem like a pomegranate.
and the work is such that the patient puts his head on your shoulder, then he opens his eyes and holds all of that flesh in suitable unguents to it, and sustains it with force;
then scrape the first flesh, and go all scraping to the razor just to the end, and take care that you do not cut the eye at the work;
and let the incision of the sputum be like what we have said in the incision of the wound, and with small forces, one takes out the scab, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply oil of seld or distillate red pepper and similar corrosive medicines to it, and put a piece of cotton on top with egg white, so that it is assuredly sealed up after the abscess.
and if there is no residue, and the blood rises to the surface, and you doubt an abscess is hot, then let go of it and treat the abscess with things calming a hot abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make sure that the bone is joined in the oil by this method.
But always remember that you should hasten the treatment of each weak oil along the natural way; and by the accidental way, in iron work;
and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from this work.
Blood vessels are red veins that are covered on the eye and tolerate the eye's work and weaken the eye forever.
It is necessary then to examine first whether the oil, in which it lies, is pure, and there is no other disease besides this one. then treat it in this manner:
command the patient to place his head in your care, then suspend those veins at all times according to his wisdom, and let the veins be subtle doubles according to this form:
And let there be two onions by degree in one body according to this form:
then bind those veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins remove themselves from sight;
and be sure not to wet the eyes with points of spatulae, and do this work at the hour of noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you don't cool off before those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill in the oil a green and red bittersweet to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous substance.
And if you are unable to bind everything in that hour, then make a poultice on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of a hot abscess, then resume according to this manner which is before until he is healed.
and this is the form of forces:
The doctor is called "arissati" fistula:
when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason that you should cut open the abscess above, where it should die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then apply all the instruments that are in the form of this.
and it is called "aspere chief", and be made from fair indigo to the chief bent, and be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed.
and make it happen any time, then restore the place with medicinal exacerbations.
if the bone is set, and flesh grows back, and the bowels of the body are set, and remain thus for XL days, and it does not heal and is not inflamed, and bad events do not occur, know that it is healed.
if not, then there is no other way than to bring the fistula back to the natural orifice according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron and old medicines, and when it is uncovered then take a force according to this form, and let the iron point be at three angles, and the fistula be reduced just up to the head as you see here:
then place it on the bone next to the rim, and remove your hand from the point I made, then turn back all the force until it pierces the bone and let the patient feel by what the vein does if he keeps his hand on his navel;
and then restore the place of dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the skin has hardened and the places are set, then the matter goes to the night; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction or hindrance in the night, nor any decrease, then it is necessary that you bind the patient;
then make the patient well, then apply leeches or cupping glasses to draw out blood without harming, then put on the eye a concoction made of aloes and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye and plaster it with bandages and cloths;
and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, and fold each one into four parts, and then place one on top of another according to the amount that the eyes need;
Then strain above with a strong bandage, and reapply the poultices to suck without causing harm.
Then remove the poultices and leave the oil constricted day and night, and if the swelling subsides, then you should constrict it tightly.
Then remove the ligament after the day and night, and if you see the oil repairing, that is good.
If not; Then reapply the ointment and bandages and ligament and poultices until it is healed.
of the rupture of the vitreous humor. When disruptions come in the vitreous humor, then it becomes cloudy and comes forth in paper-like strips like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
Then if you see it covering, the operation is such that you pierce an awl in the root of the part below up to the point above, then pierce another awl where there is a double thread from the part of the eyebrow. and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then bind the end of the doubled thread and tie a part of it around, and pull it tight well, then draw out the needle and place on it wet linen cloth in abundance enough.
and leave it so that the thread binds with the wound, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed.
and at times the wound is restrained by a cloth circle on each side, until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear to be swollen, then make a small puncture in the pupil with the subtle spatumile that comes from the oil, and correct the moisture that is cloudy and descend the eyes, and enter inside soon.
then pull it out until it is healed.
This illness which is called "alcunnati" is not far from the corner of the eye which is assembled in the eye, resembling a drop descending, and it is not water;
and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you cause the patient to sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head in your hands from both parts, and move them until you see the corner coming up to your eyes; then it should be fixed, and not descend, and the light should be scattered, and see the patient things as they usually do;
and if it does not come down below, know that it is water, and if the corner's descent is not arranged as we have said.
then cause the patient to sit in your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a hole on the concave part of the eye by continuous movement with the conjunctiva along the concave part and the crown, until the corner comes out.
and when it is dislocated, so it is distilled in hot water mixed with honey or with water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
From the waters of the eye. We have the likenesses of waters in the division, and that which is necessary for piercing; if one works according to health.
It is necessary that you cause the patient to sit between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and the healthy eye should be kept very tight.
then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right;
then take in your right hand if the eyes are left, or in your left hand if the eyes are right, the instrument which is called "almagda";
Then place the point of the instrument below the crown by the width of a finger in that corner of the eye from the outer to the smaller tear duct, then push the "almagda" instrument virtuously, and turn your hand until it pierces into the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the very end of the measurement of the space which is from the prominence just to the end of the nose. and this is the crown of the eye;
If you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal fabric, and then place the instrument just above or below where the liquid is, then press down one path after another.
If the water descends now, then the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a little while, and if the liquid rises again on the second path, place force with the instrument, and when it is well fixed and does not move, then extract almagda gently by turning your hand slowly.
and then put it back in water with a little bit of gemstone oil, and leave it like that. Then put by the way the eye stopped or moistened linen in rose oil and abundance of egg white, and bind with holy oil.
Now, and those who are of our time, put on a common broth with abundance of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce only the conjunctive, and do not go too far in depth, but make it subtle, then put almagd into it, as we have said.
and when the work is complete, prepare the patient's bed for the doctor to come, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark.
and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be according to his own condition just until the third day.
then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him look at some things, and then put the bandage back on just until the seventh day.
and it is not necessary that you do this in the course of healing or after incising now, but rather you should speed up what needs to be done, because the water rises quickly.
if an abscess appears, then you should lance the pus in front of the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess.
and when it is appeased, then lance the abscess and place a piece of gold foil on its surface to cover it for some day, and let it be thus in that dark house.
And then bring out from the dark house little by little, and turn back into its former state;
and know that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one came to us from the land of Irach who told us that in his country people would make a wound pierce all the way through, so that the water could come out, but I never saw any such thing in our land nor did I ever read about it in the books of old. and by chance it's a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of madness, because he who does not know them sees them;
and are of earth properly: And the ends of these are of the same subtlety, and the last one is in three sharp corners.
Sometimes boils or pustules arise that are diverse and varied, because some of them resemble scorpions in many places;
and if there are such or if it has a boil enchanted with red color, and if the boil is soft of white color. In that one then of those boils which is soft and not enchanted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands in front of the sun;
In that one then of those boils which is soft and not enchanted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands in front of the sun; and work his nostrils, and pour the poultice on those boils, and treat them fiercely; and then apply that which you can sustain with the subtle and sharp spatula from one side, as long as you know that boil is completely opened.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, then open up everything with the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. and if it does not disturb you, or the abscess is closed, then follow its course as it should.
and if these are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the blood is staunched and all the pus is removed, then pour in either boiling water or vinegar or wine. If the poultice works not, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed.
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is bone new in the bone above, to which the instruments do not come because they cannot cut through.
then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen about the size of a thumb, and have it well oiled by hand, and leave a space of about an inch or less between each knot. and put the patient's head into the chest of the child in his cradle to their power, and draw out in smelling until it comes through the neck into the mouth;
and many times do thus with children at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do so;
then hold the head that comes through the neck in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and take one after the other being as we are on the thread.
Do this as long as you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back into the cradle just like before.
do this for three days or more, until the oils corrupt all that remains of flesh.
and then put a bandage of linen some days until he is healed, and if he needs medicinal ointments, so he uses them;
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills the oils and medicines or bandages:
And let it be of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a candlestick, and lead to it as well;
and if you see, make a bandage closed, and the instruments full to purify the head;
and have a cloth at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
Of the flesh on the night.
Often a disease called "telul" arises on the head, grows and becomes large eventually, so that it is a thing to behold.
and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the head at first, and scrape away all the pus, then put on top the cautery or burning medicine;
and if one delays covering it so long that it becomes great, then take note if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sensation:
if one does not lance it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when one opens it sometime, then great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of foul color, and you see that it can be entirely opened, then empty the patient and open it without fear, and care for the place by drying and binding.
Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these joint works, it is of little profit, except for some men.
It is necessary then that this be done to anyone, if one looks to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then close the two lips with a suture, and care for it until it is healed.
and if the lips are already split on both sides, then it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their skin until they heal, then close the two lips with a suture, and bind it tight, and powder it with dragon's blood powder, and frankincense powder. and put on the powder a piece of ointment of strength or other ointment binding, and let it stay until it heals by itself, then anoint with oil until it is sound.
The manner of sewing is that you assemble the seam: or by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have made known to you.
of abscesses of the lips
At times, within the abscess hard as stone, resembling small pebbles, smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each side, and take it with tweezers and clip in each part;
then apply the plaster after the incision of vinegar poultice, until the blood is staunched.
and then anoint with oil and care for the wound with dry things until it is sound.
Many times there appears on the gums a white patch which the old people call "albulus".
so it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and clip at its root, and let the blood or juice flow.
then place on the wound a piece of vitriol glass, or other drying and constricting powders;
and if that white patch returns after the incision, and many times it does occur, then clip it a second time, and cauterize it. if it does not return after the cauterization;
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant skin. and sometimes they are black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink.
If it is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and rest the bones or skins as appear, until there is nothing left. and thus make blackness and greenness, and yellowing and the other discolorations, until they are cleared.
and if one takes away what is at the first reason, it is good; unless not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have cleared everything.
and know that the teeth have need of various forms of instruments to clear, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which one removes tartar from the teeth has other forms than he who scrapes between the teeth. and these forms and others be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait until it is ready to be pulled as long as possible, for this should not be done quickly. for it is a very high substance just up to there so that one does not have any excuse for regretting.
Then when the patient is forced to vomit, you must be certain about the aching tooth. The patient suffered many times from the pain and thought it was a toothache of Saint Dent, and had the good tooth pulled out. and yet the pain does not depart from him for this reason, until the evil is extracted, for we have already tried to do so with these saints.
and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape all around the tooth with a very sharp instrument to protect the gum from all sides.
then move it to your hands or thin forceps at the first notch and notch, until it is well extracted, then firmly hold the forceps. and let the patient's hip be between your holy thighs, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it inside from each side lightly, and move it as you did initially.
And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it is necessary to fill it with cloths, where the cavities are. and if you strain it subtly with forceps, that it does not break when straining;
and it is necessary to gently cover around the gum for loosening the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and leave one part, and let the tooth regrow in the patient through the evil of the root, causing greater pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who, due to their haste and boldness, sometimes break the carriage and bring about nothing of what we have recounted.
but sometimes it comes to pass through the opening of those great diseases from the roots that remain, or from the carriage that breaks, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is loose, wash it with vinegar or oil of sedge.
and if blood comes out and flows, which often happens, then apply the white of egg to it.
and if that doesn't help, then cauterize it.
The forms of the extractors, by which one removes the teeth first, should be long and pointed, with thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth.
and these are the forms: And be of great strength so that they do not bend at all to the pulling, and be well tempered as iron, and be toothed so that they may hold tightly.
Of the root of the teeth When the root remains to be pulled out, it is necessary that you place a damp cloth soaked in butter on the area for one or two days until the skin is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the shoulder seems like a well-shaped beak.
and should be made inside like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out at all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is known as a palisade, by which this is its form:
And it is good if it breaks forth and grows large, so long as it does not break, and if the roots spring forth through this, it is well.
If not, then help yourself with all the instruments, by which the forms come after that.
And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two handles, it is thus the form: and other tools that are before in relation to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pincers, it is thus the form:
And it is good for these instruments to be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments of steel are; and also with other instruments which are not counted.
and wise and subtle masters find for themselves the instrument according to their own works and the disease reveals, for there are some diseases where ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of bones and if it breaks or not, as it should be, so one searches for instruments that are needed, which I have said, and helps with gestures, by which the form is here:
And let them be large and well-held to hold the bone, lest it slips away, but let him be able to hold and remove.
and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if it has corruption in the bone, and it is small, so heal it with all these instruments:
When the teeth appear not according to the natural course of the body, and their shape is ugly, and even more so in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth has grown after the previous one, and is not in its right place, and cannot be smoothed or filed.
then draw it; and if it is stuck with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and made of iron that is sharp at its tip.
And the copes are cut and cut in small pieces over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file like this is its form:
and it is also like the file used to make needles;
and in lime the tooth grows gradually bit by bit each day lighter, so it does not move until it falls out;
then the edge of the tongue in the end becomes completely smooth, and if the tooth is too sharp and it hurts the tongue, then one should file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the tooth in front falls out through percussion or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they are eating without choking, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, and this does not work;
so it is necessary to restrain them with a thread of gold, for the sons of silver turn green and perish, but gold does not change at all;
and let the middle thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et if you see to straighten the teeth, then take the thread and bind it double between two healthy teeth, then put the jaws between the sick teeth, if there is one or more, so that you come to a slight bleeding up to the healthy tooth of the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and slightly, so that it does not move;
and have your ligature at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then tie the jaw with thread to a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and reposition between the healthy tooth, so that it does not wound the tongue;
and then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it slips or the threads break, so restrain it with another thread;
If it remained and served thus all its time, and that is the form of the teeth and the shape of the direction of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, one should put it back in its place gradually, bit by bit, as we have said;
and does not meddle with it unless one is wise and patient, and sometimes makes the shape of a whalebone tooth, and puts it in the place where there is a defect, and holds it thus as we have said, and remains and serves so for a long time.
Sometimes this growth comes from under the tongue or from nature, which one is born with; or by an accident of a wound that has been healed;
and the work is such that you should operate on the patient's mouth, and have their head in your hand, and lift up the tongue;
Then tie the ligament nervous of the large vein, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is stiffness or numbness, and this is a sudden wound, so insert the ligature and tie the large one.
and make sure that the incision is not too deep in front, for the artery which is underneath;
and when you have done, then lift up the leaf of rose and easy water, or cold water, and put beneath the tongue a tent of linen;
and let the patient wear it each night, so that the swelling cannot become hardened.
And if bleeding comes forth, then put vinegar on the leaf; and if the bleeding is excessive, then cauterize it with a slow fire cautery, which is good for this. then treat it with another treatment until it is healed;
and if you see it as a yellow color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, then don't touch it, for it is a chancre;
and if it is declining into gangrene, and there is moisture, so one pours in the onion juice, and the pain becomes subtle, and delivers on both sides; and if the blood swells at your work, so apply vinegar broth as long as it is stayed, then return to your work until you take out all the residue;
then lift up the load of easy and skill, and care for it with other cares until it is healed.
of throat apostemes Sometimes a growth comes within the throat called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you care for them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then beware:
If it's an abscess of small sense and dark color, then don't touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is thick, then don't touch it with iron, also for the bleeding of blood; but let it be until it dies, and then you will cut it apart, or it will break apart by itself;
and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but look first if the abscess is at rest and is soothed.
Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his eyes should be in good health, and make him open his mouth and take hold of the servant between his hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, so that there is the form.
and it should be of silver or subtle bronze, just like our knives:
You press down the tongue on all this instrument and you see the abscess, then take the awl and the peg and place them in the almond, and drag it above as much as you can.
and take none of these things from the cloths with you, then cut off the instrument, by which it is shaped, as if by some force; and all the same, the head is curved, one way and another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or andiron;
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, so that it is in the form: And be notched on one side and the other named;
And when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with hot water, or cooked pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; Then care for him until he is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, if you cut them then as the two almonds are joined.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was growing inside her throat, to wit, the abscess of little sense;
and had already tightly closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not expire through the obstructed passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had stayed like that for one or two days.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two canals through the two nostrils of the nose.
I hastened then at once, and inserted a poultice in one place, then let the tumor break open, and extracted a large portion of pus.
then I refilled the other part in the other cavity of the wound, and worked on the mouth and pressed the tongue.
After piercing the abscess with this instrument, and cutting out a part of it, and only issued forth but a small amount of blood; and thus the conduit of the throat in the woman was dislocated, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut into that abscess for a long time;
and the abscess kept growing again, and filled the space that I had emptied, so much that it became very large;
then I bound it and cauterized it within the throat: and thus it stopped growing;
and I departed from those parts, and only God did anything with them afterwards.
of the vein
When the swelling goes down to the vein, and it is swollen and is long, then it is called "perpendiculaire";
and if it is under a large and rounded one, so it is called "uve".
When she is cured as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided, and it is subtle, then you must cut it off;
and that which is rounded and assembled and is not long; and if it is sanguine or of a dusky color or black, then you should avoid making an incision on it. For there is great danger for the patient.
It is necessary, then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its size and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument which we have remembered here before. then fix the onyx in the "uve", and train it below, and cut with both instruments that I have said in the incision of two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not cover at all except for the superfluity that is beyond the natural term;
for if you cover more, it causes grief to voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear of being covered, then you should use cunning in the cauterization to dispel their fear.
And the manner of the cauteration is gentle and smooth. And it is that the patient puts his head on your shoulder, and then presses his tongue onto the instrument which we have said in the chapter of cautery, and moistens with fresh water so that it is not too thick or too clear. and insert the tip of this instrument, which has the form:
And let the patient have a comb or a brush with which to apply the medicine, just like the bristles of a spoon, and put the instrument all over the wound.
and the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and phlegm flowing from his mouth with the medicine inside do not descend to the throat and cause bleeding.
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the ulcer for half an hour's worth of time, until you see it turn necrotic and the medicine's irritation be appeased.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the entire cotton within the sheath above, until the cotton adheres to the ulcer.
and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and inspect after 3 or 5 days.
And if you need to start the cauterization again with the medicine, then do so, and after the cauterization, surround the ulcer with a layer of cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse all that is around the medicine.
and let him be treated with cold water, and be cured of gargling until he is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, not the fire cauterization;
If it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avens and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them into one pot, and put it aside, and make it boil;
and let the pot be well glazed with good earth, and within the pot have a utensil carved according to this manner: And be of silver or iron, and let one of the keys be stuck in the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the tube until the eye is suffocated;
after it resumes often, as long as the eye is dry, and take care that you do not make this happen at the beginning of the abscess's heat, for many things occur there; and do not make anyone move except at the relining of an abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cord and put a needle of cloth inside the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat. for the cloth needle does not let the vapour weigh upon the mouth, and it is a good cure together with health.
Many times it is necessary to cut at the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing else;
so then you must try to see what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see how the thing is;
and what does not appear to you and is regurgitated in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit at once when the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the things are forced out by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navy cloth, or a lettuce root, or a fragment of dry bread; and there is string on the sponge and then he swallows it again; and when it comes to the stomach, if it will not pass, and then you should pull it out;
and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take the instrument of punch according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the top so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the top raised high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest all life come to an end, nor push the bone inside;
and make sure that the patient puts the instrument in, because it may be necessary or something is forced out; If the bottle is below, or he draws it far out to all the instruments equally, until it is far.
Of the snot from the throat
No time is medicine for blood, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, and then press his tongue onto the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the sweat, so treat it with all small incisions or with fine forceps that are worth this.
And if this is not worth it, take a braided cord, and tie it around the patient's throat, then tie the cord to the bed or bedstead, and do this often. And if the patient has water all day.
then take a full view of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with his hand often. and if soon after the blood feels the water, then it stops.
And if it does not stop as we said, then suffumigate the patient with assafetida at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the eye.
It happens many times, for she will fall without warning.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are burning coals, and it should be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that perforation should be the key of the instrument.
Then you throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out but reaches just to the sweat.
and the sweat will now flow, and if it does not flow, then repeat the fumigation many times;
and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty and sweet things, and does not drink water;
and then it is necessary for them to get up by means of this treatment.
The shape of the instrument used to remove pus is like curved tweezers designed for entering the throat. and it resembles a doctor's beak and has a roughness of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go.
Many likenesses of abscess are, according to what is remembered here after one and the other in this book, and they vary in piercing and cutting.
and it is in two manners, one being its own likeness, and due to the fact that it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the loose joints where they are in the body.
for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fatty part are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses, one must not puncture them until the bow is broken according to its fulfillment.
and if there are such that one must puncture when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as abscesses which are near joints.
For when abscesses come in joints, and one leaves it until it is full of pus around it, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes constriction in that member.
Where the abscess is located on the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes gangrenous, then harm will come to the principal limb.
where it is located at the foundation, if one pierces it even when it is dead;
and it is not good that you pierce an abscess without complete digestion, except for one located at the foundation, which cannot be fully pierced and will be lengthened inside, and a fistula will form. and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the softening and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
and it is necessary to make the piercing sit or depend more on the abscess, where it opens up movements.
and let the piercing be in the long part of the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or in joints and at the nails and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no swelling. In those who are bent, according to that member.
And when abscesses are in the right place, so it is worth doing that you let the puncture be done until it is confirmed in complete digestion as we have said.
For if you pierce before them, it will lengthen the body from the vein of blood, and is full of much bad pus. and by chance harden the lips and the deeper parts of him.
And if there is any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need it.
And it is necessary that you make small abscesses, small incisions; and in great abscesses, great incisions, and many splits according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the core, and cover; when he has become like a rag doll, and is exhausted, so one should do likewise to babies:
and if they are split into three angles, and if there are those which are cut like the branch of myrtle, as abscesses of the shoulders;
and if there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those who do not have a head, like a soft abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you puncture thoroughly;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has gathered great pus, that you puncture, but not pull out all the pus at once, but rather remove some of it; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then do not touch anything above that. Do what often happens little by little, until the bowels empty completely.
Similarly, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the spirits are shaken some times with the issue of the bowe, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take care.
Therefore, be cautious in this chapter and when you have opened the abscess, if the wound opens, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small. and if it's a clean cut, try to mend with linen or old cotton. and if it's a great abscess and there are many pus-filled cavities, you must put a tent in each one so that they come together.
and if you have cut away a part of the skin from the abscess and wrapped it around, you must fill it with old cotton or a linen rag without moisture, and bind it just up to three days.
then the surgeon, and the doctor of oiling, until he is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, then mix cold water and vinegar, and wet the cloth moistly, and place it on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
And if the bleeding persists, let a government and care be administered to him, and the powders that I have said in this book, and put them in his hands; and if it is the time of winter, and the ulcers or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary that you spread tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and hot oil.
and if it is in summer, and the ulcers are fleshy, then it is necessary that you put wet cloths on him in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
and then open up the abscess and the ulcer and treat him, as is necessary, until he is healed.
And this is necessary to know universally in treating of abscesses:
I have said how one must go before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
Or when the boil on the head comes, it is small abscesses that come forth in the manner of threads, just as the yolk of an egg, and there are many similar things.
There are some that are fat and such where there is moisture as well as pimples;
and if there are those that are hard and stony to cut through, and one has no doubt that the artery will not go against.
And the work of the cutting is that you test all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes afterward, whatever thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then dry it with the long cloth above.
And when the moisture is drained, one must scrape away without leaving anything behind the peel that contains that moisture, because it will come back again if one leaves anything.
then plunge the cloth in Egyptian oil, if it is present; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain of the night.
And then reapply the cloth, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night;
Then cure the wound of ointment as is necessary, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is not too large, then cut it according to this form, from long. and cut off the excess skin and scrape off all sides, and put all your care of drawing out the abscess from where it lies.
and if the artery makes you resist, then do what I told you afterwards.
And similarly, do with the abscess if it is pitted, and cutting and curing as I told you.
And cut on top of the pitted abscess and the moist one, for it is lighter, since they are full of blood. And if any of these abscesses or swellings do not have moisture, and among those that I cut open on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess just like a barren stone, rough and white, and could not break it. and if anyone had hit it, they would have made the same wound as from a stone.
Other abscesses coming from the head, greater than those that come to the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, so that pus may issue forth.
and it is treated as is fitting.
Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are very bad, and are entangled with one another.
And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, such as those on the neck and abscesses on the head, as we have said. and similar things to these scrofulas are many.
and similar things to these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that will not obey health.
in that one then you see with good disposition for prodding, and it is similar in color to the body, mute on each side and not inflamed towards the nerves of the neck or artery or duct, and it is not deep.
so it is fitting that you cut it above, and scrape each part, and if necessary take the two lips of the key to the incisions, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et the wound is small and small, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor let the spatula come into contact with it, lest the hands escape, and do not look too far ahead, so as to avoid cutting what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work further, then put in the wound vinegar or boil some powders that stop bleeding, and bind the wound; and let it be so until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound becomes soft and begins to rot.
And when the bleeding has stopped, then return to your work until you have completed it;
then take care to note if any small scrofulae remain, and cut them and clean them.
If he has great swelling in the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary to cut that scrofula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall away without harm.
Then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian oil, then apply the treatment.
And if you cover the entire scrophula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, then there will be no remaining superfluity because of the greatness of the scrophula. it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it and pull tight, and sew as we have said.
it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it and pull tight, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that have excess fluid, puncture where it appears swollen;
and puncture it thus as was said before, depending on the situation, then apply poultices with oil and similar things, so that what remains of the corruption is corrupted. and when the wound is well cleansed, apply the ointment to the charred flesh until it is healed.
The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
To those who have strangulated, it is necessary that the incision of the throat which is called "epiglote" be removed. and one does not help by doing so, because all the veins and the pulse of the patient are hot in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both testicles.
When the disease is in the channel of the plexus, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut of the syphac, not in the cartilage.
and it is suitable for the cutting of the epiglote that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the whole length, then cuts the leather until it comes to the chin. and avoid bleeding vessels if you see anything, and then compress the sacrum, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the willow branch that springs forth from a broken joint and by its failure to voice;
and leave the open wound for a while.
And when the hour has passed about which we doubt the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew it all up without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that cause growth, until he is healed.
I also said that one should not do this just until the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the fault is about to fail. Then compress the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death;
and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four, and then they command to sew up the wound and treat, until it is cured;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat and cut off part of the channels of the throat.
and I was called to cure her, and I found her as dead.
I uncovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor guided the flow except for the throat, and the blood was flowing out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed her so she was well.
and it happened to the maiden that she lost her voice, and returned afterwards to her former state;
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis one should not have fear.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of jasper, and it occurs very often in women;
and it occurs in two manners: natural and accidental;
there is no trick.
And the accident occurs in two manners, one of which is similar to our flesh, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it does not seem right to work with fire in someone who is small, and he proves and searches through all the surrounding area; if you find him as one without flesh, and he is unable to move in any way, then cut, just like one cuts into flesh, and treat all his clothing if there is none; and search thoroughly, and cure him as it seems right, until he is perfectly healed.
There are many manners of us, which I will say all the likenesses;
and it is right that I tell all the difference that is between our flesh and a dislocation.
I say that heat and fever persisting, until the ebullition is passed, and the purging is completed; Then the fever and heat cease.
With the wound not having heat or fever or pain, and containing its pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a jaundice, and becomes swollen;
and are according to its appearances, whether yellow or white, or moist, and much in color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the flesh, that you examine and inquire first through all the instruments that are called "intimate", according to what its form will be or according to the chapter that follows.
And the manner of incising abscesses is that you take as much moisture as you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers back and forth, until you know that the instruments have pierced to the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the intermediary, and take care to see what jumps forth.
If moisture comes across a wound, regardless of its color, do it as I have said with other abscesses;
and if after the intermediary no moisture comes, know that it is fat, then do it in a cross shape, and take hold of it with pincers, and scrape it lightly from each part and watch the coat where it lies as you lead it safely with the needle;
and if you cannot lead it safely, then cut it into pieces so that there is nothing left.
For if anything remains, the flux will come back many times;
and if a little remains and the blood gives you grief, then apply a wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put on soothing things abscess hot, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if it is great, then cut off both lips of the wound, and treat those who are injured inside.
and if the vein beats against you or something else that's contrary or if you're in a hurry and apply the lead of vitriol powder, and let it stay for two or three days until the wound can be cleansed, and allow the ebullition of blood. then come back to cover what remains from the night.
See here the forms of the trephines, and they are in three manners: great, middle, and small;
and there are three quadrants which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and they come in three manners: great, middle, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
et are also like the needles used to sew sorceles, and they are of citrine earth, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most valuable, and are more tested with black lead to surround the ravines of fistula;
and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the holes.
The shapes of onyches are many in kindreds, as you see here:
and if onyches which have two holes of three kinds also;
and if onyches which have three holes, and are also of three kinds;
and if onyches which have two holes, and single onyches with one hole, and are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these wounds is such that one cuts, and there are some who do not cut more than from one side, with which we scrape the nerves, therefore one does not strike the vein or nerve.
and these intruders are responded to with bandages, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
and one does not use more than a little at the well-tempered places, such as legs, arms, sides, and armpits, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling scissors for flaps, according to this form, with which one stops blood: and it is placed sometimes in the place that heals by cutting open veins and arteries, and sometimes retorted according to this great form;
Breast milk swells in some men when they begin to be corrupted, so much that it seems like the breasts of a woman.
and remain swollen and enlarged, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form of the line from b to g. then scrape off the fat, and apply medicinal paste to the wound, allowing it to form scabs, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and nurse it until it is healed.
and if the breast droops down and is moist due to its size, just as it happens in women, then make an incision in two folds above, through two similar openings. so that one is attached to the other at the end of each and held by a thicker line which contains the thinner one according to this form from line b to line g. puns skorche the skin which is between the two lips and removes the fat and applies what we have said about stitching and powders and what is necessary in the cure as long as it is healed.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not yet fully made because the patient does not want to rest or due to the outflow of blood so it is necessary that you fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive oil. and let it be until what remains and the fat are digested then cure it as long as it is healed.
This abscess that comes from under the armpit is a type of hard scrofula or if it has nodules, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and cure it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then cut it as we have said in incisions of scrofula, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
When the artery is stretched and the skin above is glued together it comes to be many times abscessed and it also happens that the vein swells up and becomes abscessed.
and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery then the abscesses are long in depth. and when you feel it to your elbow, so it strains.
and when it's due to the vein, then it appears to be a reason to flee away.
and it's foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it is under the armpits and angles and neck and in many other places, and it's very large. Then it's necessary to apply the treatment of fire, and also for the one at the head, and in that which is swollen from an artery going above the skin of the long.
then work the incision up to the bones, and part the artery from the flesh, until it is uncovered.
then insert below it an awl, and make it pierce up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then point the place which is between the two strings of an instrument until the blood that is there issues, and let the abscess be freed.
Then administer the treatment that belongs to the bow, as long as the string breaks. Then heal those parts of ointment belonging to this, until they are sound.
and if the abscess is caused by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you dip your hand in what belongs to the abscess all over the skin, then thrust the needle under the place that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I told you, or join one end of two parts to the two heads of the thread.
and if you doubt that the thread will not come out far enough, then insert another needle under all the threads below all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
then cut away the abscess until the excess matter comes out, then cut away the excess of the wound and leave what is connected;
then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then minister to him with poultices and salves until he is healed.
Just like abscesses come in the artery and vein when they are hardened or due to excessive effort, or similar things, so too do abscesses come at the nails when they are worn out or due to great labor, and similar causes.
And this often happens with the shoulder and elbow joints, and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and is more numerous without pain.
and when one strains it strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the very depths of the body, but under the wound;
and it is well from all sides, and does not go nor come forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and the one who is in joints does not need to be closed with iron: by chance I will see a contraction; and the one who is in the head or forehead, makes the skin of the spatula-like.
and the one who is in the head or forehead, makes the skin of the spatula-like. If the abscess is small, so hold it with forceps and cut at its root;
and if it is large, so suspend it with a needle and scrape it, then cut and reassemble the wound to its seam, and keep caring until it is healed.
Often it happens in bellies and not elsewhere than that, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to ears, and has subtle roots and large heads;
and there are some small and very great ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than any other thing, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were split open, and in them flowed moisture.
I copied them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the works in the incision are such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the articul is white and moist and of subtle root; so he cut at the spatiumile wide, and there were in your presence fire cauterization.
so he cut at the spatiumile wide, and there were in your presence fire cauterization. For in cutting, there often come many great outpourings of blood, and if the blood overflows, then you must hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient trembling and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind the articul as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to draw the thread of flax until it reaches the arthralgia, and choose by it a sensible work.
and if the roots are thick, though it may seem fearful to cut into it, even so you can still cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not relapse.
then treat the wound, and take care that you do not cut the thoul which is of foul color and poor sense and little regard.
For it is an infected abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre later after this.
when the boil is full If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery of a wound or an incision of syphilis, and it is on the belly and in some of the bones, as it often does in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness.
and if it is from the wound of syphilis and from the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears through various issues. And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its mouth it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes bound, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strong work.
And if it's because of moisture, it's a light thing, and it's clear when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrain at all;
and if it's because of blood, so apparent by these signs the abscess is large and hard, and is filled according to a quantity; and if it's because of windiness, so sensitive to touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
and if it's because of windiness, so sensitive to touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness. You must leave it alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to intestine or bile, then you should instruct the patient to hold his abdomen and be stretched out straight, then sign by circling around the belly; then command him to lie down soon between your hands, then go around the spot you have signed at all the surrounding skin, then expose half of the abscess above to all the great union; Then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of firm silk firmly, and let it be well secured by the bond.
Then work on the middle part of the abscess extended over the bond, and put your finger index, and pierce the intestine. If you find it caught on the bond, then untie it, and push the intestine further into the belly from the rear.
And if you find the bowel, take hold of it with the onca [hook or scoop], and remove the surplus.
And if the artery resists you, or the vein, then go around gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two firm threads, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross as if you were piercing.
Then strain the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let it remain as long as it will drain, and cut away the dead flesh by itself. When you cut where there is subtlety and opening, then cure it as needed, and leave the abscess as we have said.
When you cut where there is subtlety and opening, then cure it as needed, and leave the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as needed, and bind it.
of the chancre We have said in the division the likenesses of chance, and how one should work on it by medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment with fire.
and we say that chance in general is found in the groin, and great care should be taken in the cure, and they say that when chances are in the place where one can scrape it off like a pustule that is in the armpits, and in the crotch, and in similar places, and all must be removed when it starts.
None were ever cured by this before me.
And the works, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient sometimes of black bile;
Then make him well if he has manifest fullness, then prepare the patient in good condition to do the work;
Then cast out your warts or pustules, and shave all parts, and file down all bones without leaving anything.
and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the place with your hand or anything, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you oppose it, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped. then heal another wound as long as he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicine, and that which is cured by fire:
and one must not touch with iron in these two likenesses: it is to know, tympanites and hyposarchosis, because it is deadly;
so when you treat this likeness of dropsy called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as flux and similar things; if one must not touch with iron, because there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and they have no other disease but dropsy alone, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should thus proceed; lift the patient upright on your hands, and the attendants press the belly from below, pushing water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spatula-shaped thorn according to this form; And be cut into two parts. at a point, and yet it may not be so far that it can come to the intestine when one sets it in, and cannot be hurt;
then look to see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary, then you cut on top of the mouth three fingers' width above the nose bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver sickness, then your incision should be on the left side of the mouth three fingers' width;
and if it is due to wind, then it should be on the right side, and it does not seem necessary for the patient to lie on top of the incision so that superfluities do not flow to that weak place;
then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and plug it, and lift your hand away from all the fat between the skin and the muscle also as when trimming to the quantity of an fingernail or around;
Then pierce the sac so that the pus comes to the natural outlet, and this is the sign of water; then remove the poultice, and put in this instrument which has the shape: And it is similar to a silver thread, and it is of terra vera or of a light-colored lead, and has a small pit in the lower part. and on the side of one part, three pits; and two on another part, and one on another;
and it is the key cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers cut the quill:
at the top above is the alamel, so that when the instruments come to water, they now descend immediately on the instrument;
then empty it then the half or the third part, for if you empty more than is necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the exhaustion of his spirit from the arm, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death;
but according to emptiness as much as the quality of his virtue, and according to what the virtues of the sick person signify, and his hairs;
then take the instrument and hold the edge, and it is held now because of the key that stops the perforation which is above the scrotum, of which I spoke, so you pierce in this manner;
then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of water;
do this each day, and be careful not to make him stay but for a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him have too much water, then the treatment of the grave or sand will be hot, and by sweating or bathing in the sun, and if he becomes accustomed to drinking; and apply the treatment of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
Some children are born with a hernia in the penis, or the hernia is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary soon that he does not pierce at all the subtleties of the body according to this form:
then place the poultice with a subtle cloth of linen on it, and bind it and keep it so for three days or four, and when he wants to make water, then remove the wrapping, let him make water, and then reapply.
and by chance it is not necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not allow it to be closed.
That which belongs to he who has a small abscess is treated with powdered hornbeam, as we have said, if it will spread.
Those who do not have the hernia in its place are blinded, for none are born with a hernia at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate before if they do not lift their penis up. and they are unable to discharge because the matter cannot come just to the margin, and this is a bad disease.
The manner of work is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the instrument and the curve also like the shape of a feather, so that the percussor chooses a hundredth part in the middle, as it should.
and take care to prevent excessive bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of pustules on the penis Many times these things come forth from the instrument, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh.
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
so you should take them with great subtlety and cut off and cleanse all of them, then apply moist cotton in Egyptian ointment. then care for it with divine ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, having a foul smell and a bad color, then you should apply a cauterization to it.
When you have cut it, and if the albata is in the skin of the scrotum, and part is inside the peel and part outside, then you must remove the albata that is inside first. and when it is bound, then heal the one outside.
For when you heal it together, then the head of the scrotum is not assured that it will not be pierced, and soon after comes blackness and corruption in the scrotum and in the groin.
then it is necessary to scrape away everything that is black and corrupted, then spread on the plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of green walnuts and vines, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then administer the lunar cautery in this form:
The cauteries are helpful in two dispositions together: that is to say, for the purging of blood and for corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you tie a cloth around the penis or guide the penis with a piece of cloth, and let the patient urinate through.
and when the foreskin is inflamed at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or it has been due to a wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you cut it open with the sharp instrument, until the ligaments are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
and if it is a grievous thing to divide this, then it is necessary that you cut it open with the spatula or some point just above the head of the penis and the foreskin.
then gently separate them, and put a thin cloth of damp linen into the cold water so that it does not become inflamed again.
Circumcision isn't a breaking of continuity like other wounds; Yet when we do this work at our own will and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient people did not circumcise their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen that most of the masters and sages who performed circumcision around there had great power and strength, and a new skill.
So it happens that the skin is torn because there are two layers, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below. Or the wound is reopened, and it's double pain, and at the purifying which is from the blood, the tip of the member isn't assured.
and at the purifying of the wound by chance the iron escapes and hinders the work, and many times it happens in this way that there is no need for purifying and I have seen.
From the purification which is done with force to all the thread of the bond I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
When you press your hand, so cut equally in every part of the whole length. but let the thread be well stretched around the leather;
and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child, if it understands, think that you are only making him tie the thread around the stick as much as possible, and then make it slack in all ways that you can.
then make it lie between your hands straight, and reinforce the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments;
then place your hand on the stick and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the stick is; then cleanse it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, then bind it under one strap and another.
then cleanse it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, then bind it under one strap and another. and hold it as two threads should by the second ligature in the pouch and on the right index, and cut between the two threads, then lift the key above hurriedly and treat the head of the verge; then let the blood flow little by little, because it is the matter; and put powder on top and on top of the powder, a cloth glued with an egg white, cooked tempered with rose water, mixed with good rosy oil and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat another treatment until he is healed.
The shape of the force at the cleansing is this:
the two cheeks should be held and should be thrust forward, and should be the cheeks also as large as the fists equally.
the error of the cleansing is when the pus inside flows at the incision;
Then it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, as long as the flesh forms an abscess.
and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then hold it with pincers, and then cut.
And if they persist for three days, and that which is beneath the rod is swollen, then let it stay until the abscess is appeased, and scrape it lightly.
and cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the rod, lest it harm anything.
Then cure the flesh with sudden powder wound, which we have said or treated about powders, and if you cut too much beyond measure, and it goes up, then it will not harm.
then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
of the retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to obstruction of stone, or blood frozen, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the kidney or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees. And let the feet be placed on the back, and stretch his belly from above to below the back, and have the patient strain himself as much as he can. and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, whereby the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which has this form:
and let it be a subtle silver-colored beard, like the feathers of a bird. and let the dog's hair be half a palm long, and fine at the top.
And the method for stopping the flow of urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie it at the top to a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the top end of the thread into the urinary catheter.
and clip off the excess thread and insert it just to the top of the catheter, then anoint the catheter with oil or butter and with aubergine egg-white, and make the patient sit on the stool, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and stale water.
then gently insert the catheter into the penis, so that it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the mouth.
Then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless the guide or conductor of it is twisted.
Then straighten the thread to the whole length little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then pull it out and make the urine flow.
and resume the syringe until the bladder is empty, and let the patient be at ease.
When ulcerations or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see it distilled in water and medicine, then make use of all the instruments called "clepsedre", and that is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three apertures: One on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the edges are trimmed so that the medicine does not overgrow well, nor is it too wet, so that one can draw out the moisture, and then push when needed.
and when you see your medicine going into the bladder, put the head of the caster in the moisture, and draw on drawing that is within.
If you pull out the moisture from the keyhole, and then push it strongly with the drawing-in; If the moisters enter in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel them;
and this is the subtle form of enema by which one purges the bladder:
And it is of silver or of walnut, and the head is higher;
and below lies under the armpit or where the vein lies;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see purging the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pipe on the fire;
Then push the head of the catheter into the urethra, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has passed, so that the patient feels it reach the bladder;
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it all around roundly. then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a daal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it to the instrument.
and do so as you have done with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes out to the bladder.
of stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and together with extraction medications;
and I said the difference between a pierced stone in rain, and all signs, and which stone one should work with a chisel; and in the bladder, and in the urethra;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is stuck in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that water jumps out of the bladder similar to water in its subtlety;
and I open it, and urge the patient to urinate, and he does so many times, and then swells. and at great cost these stones are broken up;
and children's recovery is easy until they are 4 years old, and it is very grievous in the elderly, and it is so for those who are between youth and old age.
and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by laxative, in order to draw out all the bad blood that is within the intestines. For sometimes it hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes falls from a great height.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder be entirely descending downwards.
Then ask and touch it inside;
If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut on the stone.
And if it doesn't yield to the touching at all, then moisten your thumb and index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is feeble, or your middle finger, if the patient is youthful and accomplished. and push it into its foundation, and ask for the stone, and when you feel it to your finger, then apply it to the navel of the bladder;
Then press on top with your finger, and push it away from you where you see cutting.
And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out at his right hand the intestines above, and with his left hand to remove the skin that is below the intestines in the part where you are making the incision.
Then he applies the spatula carefully, which is the form: And make it between those things that are between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the nave.
and be straight above the stone, and your feet should be at the foundation, and be the shape of the traveler so that it is wide at the back and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
in case the pressure on the foot which is at the foundation makes it jump away from the work;
and know that there are stones where there are angles and margins: so it is hard to get out;
and there are some that are smooth, like a flint, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
To those then where it has angles and margins, make the shape larger;
and if it does not jump, then you should strain on the pincers which are like a file at the head, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you push below the I instrument subtle curved at the top;
and if you cannot shape it thus, then widen the small hole and if the flesh is scorched, then bind it with vermilion;
and if there are more than one stones, then push the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the others, and then take out the small ones if there are more.
And if it is very large, then it must be cut out, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine flows at once elsewhere than where the wound cannot close;
but always try to extract, or dismember with pincers, until you extract it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. then bind the patient's neck so it does not come undone until the third day.
And when you loosen it, then arise very well the wound's appearance in oil and water; then treat the patient with diaphanicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until they are healed.
And if hot abscesses come to the wound and corroisons, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this so that the urine cannot pass through with the urine: then loosen your belt in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it;
then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and aid him in all ways that you know, until he is healed;
and it is necessary that all the works you do for him, that you bind his two hips, and gather the medicines on the level.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra of the penis, and fixed inside, and the urine cannot come out; if you follow what I say thus, that you cut off many times, and if not excused from cutting because of this treatment. I already have proof like that.
Take one iron rod according to this shape and be fixed at three angles in one piece:
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come down into the bladder;
then push the stick gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the stick in your hand little by little, as much as you can, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
so soon the urine will come forth, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. So is broken, and bursts forth with urine, and the patient is healed.
and if you cannot do this because something is hindering it, then take a thread and pass it under the stone and another one above, then make the rod meet the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound. and treat him until he is healed.
of stone from women
It often happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does so, then the treatment is grievous, and it is prevented by three things:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a well-instructed woman who will reveal herself to the mirrors, especially when she is barren.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing this art of hands;
and the fourth manner is that the womb of the woman is more deep-seated than that of man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity requires this, then you must take a well-known midwife, and find one, and if you cannot find one, not so much bother I cast a subtle mirror;
and the present one is a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command about the inspection of the womb; and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her dowel or foundation and seek out the womb;
and if it is true, so it constrains itself below its need, and recommends to it that it drinks its potion or takes its medicine as the patient, and gently presses its left hand on the bladder.
and if it is true, so it should move slowly and carefully from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh.
then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part. and do not move your hand above the stone or below, and be the size at first small;
and do not move your hand above the stone or below, and be the size at first small; then wet the edge in the size, if you feel the stone so far into the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that many kinds of stones are:
It is to know, small and great and harsh and soft, long and rounded, and those with ridges.
if you know the likenesses in order to know the outcome.
And if the wound bleeds, then apply a piece of red glass to it, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work until the stone is gone, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men, to help you with your work.
And if the wound bleeds, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then put powder on the spot and strain of tents and bandages, and do not start again there, and leave the stone alone and do not pull it out, lest the patient should die by chance. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is assuaged and the wounds have settled, then return to your work until the stone is out.
Ram's water is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white mucus that is beneath the furrow of the testicles, which contains the egg.
and it is called "syfac", and at no time is it properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks it is another egg; and it is the skin of the cockroach between the white syfac that we have said;
and this does not happen unless no. And the formation of this ramace is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and it spreads that material.
And at no time if it comes from percussion on the cockroaches, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white syfac that we have said, then it is the abscesses rounded, like the figure of an egg, and do not open the cockroaches, for they have moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its proper web, then it is the abscesses rounded with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it is another egg;
and if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, so it seems well to him;
therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test it thoroughly with all the quadrangular instruments, by which the shape is as before. Accordingly, what comes after the examination, judge of what is inside.
And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be purged according to his strength and the repletion of his body;
then apply a poultice on his back, on something slightly high, and put many cloths underneath him;
then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, and extend the arm to one of the two groins of the scrotum;
then take the spatula left-handed, and cut the skin of the scrotum between it and the long one down to the navel, and let your incision be entirely straight as far as the white scrotum, and scrape it subtly according to his strength;
Then pierce the syphac with a sharp instrument down to the wet part, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and make the syphac smooth.
and do not touch the kernel of the testicles, but only the syphac. cut it all out or in pieces at once, even the subtlety of its skin, for if you do not cut it well and carefully, then the water will come back.
and if the egg jumps away from your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work on the syphac.
then gather together the two leaves of the kernel of the testicles with a seam, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you cut off the vessels that are suspended, fearing the hemorrhage of blood.
Then secure the womb to all the suspensory structures, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two reeds; then secure the other part similarly to how you did the first one equally, then wash with blood, and put a linen cloth moistened in rose oil into the wound.
then secure the other part similarly to how you did the first one equally, then wash with blood, and put a linen cloth moistened in rose oil into the wound. and put another linen cloth moistened in wine and oil, and place it on the two wombs, and place above double cloths, and tie with all the cord that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and put them in a linen rag according to this resemblance and be sewn together in the girdle of the drawers, and one of the corners will take up to the foundation until the back, and the other to the part of the point.
and the other two heads on top of the II angels, and may all restriction remain in the loop of the brazier;
and sometimes medicine is administered to this cauterized area in place of iron surgery, and it is that you take a subtle cauterizing instrument, and scrape the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white suppurative fluid contained in water is revealed;
so take the cauter according to this form, and pierce that white fluid into punctures, and scrape it with this subtle hot cauter;
And scrape it in all ways you can, until you remove everything;
and guard so that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more saved; and take care to prevent bloodshed, and make sure the surgery proceeds smoothly;
and if nothing makes you go against it, boil or discharge of blood or another thing, so treat what makes you go against it, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horror, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs we have said that the ring is loose, so cause the patient to sit on a light siege. then pierce the abscess in the part below all the way across, and make the perforation long down into the body.
and let the wound be wide so that all the fluid can flow forth;
then put a cloth on the wound and tie it, and let the remaining fluid drain out, then care for it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow water to exit from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a feather or the instrument with which one treats the waters of dropsy, because the shape is as previously described;
and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will spend their days.
know that in the cutting of this reed there are more fears and dispositions, because it seems to me that one would be better off if one were to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed also to the kidneys; and it is by much cases.
It is to know by excessive bitterness and quinsy, which spreads to the groin, or from blows;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh; and does not cause pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance it is a grievous abscess that is poor and stony, of foul color, and sometimes comes from the blockage of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to the blockage of an artery, then it is known by the warmth of the abscess, when you press it at your two fingers; and it does not behoove you to touch it.
He who is made of swelling of a vein is known by its appearance to the expression of pressing with the fingers, and can well make the incision on this resemblance, and on other matters. and it is that you open the key of the stones, then place the yolk in high, and treat the white sac with white vitriol, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the yolk.
If the yolk is already mixed with these new colors, then it is necessary that you treat the yolk and the key.
and if it is dried by the vitriol, or in those things that are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension and treat the key again.
And if the birth of the scar is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then dress the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a birchen twig, with the softening of the stones, and the patient becomes grievously ill when he walks.
and the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the previous one, and although we will tell you how to do it, according to what the ancient ones did.
The patient should be made to sit on the raised siege, then place the suspensory of the testicles downward over your knees, as far as the vessels that are close to the penis, and have the master bind them tightly.
Then cut the spatula-like instrument sharply and widely across the vessels until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert an awl where there is the double thread, and tie it to the first point or the location where the vein came out, and then tie it again at the other end. Then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moisters.
Then cure the wound as for the others or one that has been wounded by a blow, so that no vessel is cut that could nourish one of the testicles.
because of this it does not come from harm and if it is all right with all the vessels then one should draw out the reins for all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
The events of this hernia are due to the section that comes from the groin or the extension above the belly in the area of the groins, because of which the intestines descend into one of the scrotums.
and this hernia is either from the groin or from stretching it, and there are two ways in which these come about from various causes:
or by percussion, or by jump, or by bray, or by lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from stretching of the groin, are that it comes gradually, little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses even down to the very bottom because the fistula presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the abscess, which makes sudden pain come to the beginning, and there are diverse appearances of apostemes under the skin near, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body at the end of the abscess.
And sometimes the intestines come down with the intestine, and are retained there, and make the patient suffer great pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron cures one should beware, because of this one must avoid them.
And the manner of working is that you instruct the patient to reach into the wound with his hand and enter into the intestine if he can. then be seated on his neck between your hands and lift up the ribs;
then pull out the skin above and cut all the skin from the loin to the long; then push inside the leaves of the skin to sew it up according to what you need to open the wound and be such that the air can come out;
then scrape off the fistula that is under the skin of the loins, until the white fistula is completely uncovered from all sides;
then put your two fingers in what separates the loins, between the white fistula that is under the skin of the loin and the second fistula; and separate what is behind the loin, and between the second fistula;
and then move to the right hand within the hollow of the knee, and place the white spot on top at your left hand, and lift the yolk towards the belt; and instruct the assistant to stretch the yolk upwards, and release what is above the knot;
and look at your two sides to see if the intestine is enveloped or hard white spot, and if you find anything, tie it under the belly;
then take a needle where there is thick thread made of X threads, and tie it in the rear part of the white spot, which is after the skin of the knee; after the belt, then cut off the knots that appear from threads, as long as there are four threads; then tie them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the white spot, which we have said is under the skin of the knee, with a strong knot of two parts; Then envelop the shoulders of sons, and bind them strongly in two parts, so that no servant who nourishes them can enter inside, lest an abscess come to harm. and place the strap above the knot according to the first long length of two digits of that one, and after these two knots leave a space of about the size of the great toe. and afterwards do all the rest according to the roundness that an egg carries;
then cut in the part which is below the skin of the groin, until the blood flows and the bowels are released, as we have said before;
then apply damp wool in oil to wounds, and put on the bandage that we have said. And sometimes the white abscess core that we have said is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood decoration. For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it falls apart by itself;
and if it is delayed to settle, then arise with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it settles.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is healed perfectly.
(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
In this vein I never saw anyone who dared to perform the iron cure.
And the ancients say that it is done like the ivy that wraps around the vine, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above, lightly below.
then cut into it, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed.
and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a boil comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the flesh.
and do not let any of the intestines come out as feces, and if some do come out, it is a sign, and repair every hour.
and yet if it stays too long in this position, so the wound or abscess increases, until the intestines are torn;
and this happens due to the extension of the abscess which is at the angles, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and inflated the skin and opening;
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: and then the patient lies down on his back between your hands, and you make the incision in the inflated swelling according to the size of three fingers;
and then extract the abscess which is underneath the skin and its surroundings, then take the razor and place it on the apparent swelling of the abscess;
and press it to the bottom of the abdomen, then cut the two apparent swellings of the abscess on the head of the razor, and cut one and the other;
Then remove the head of the right road, and do not cover at all the scrotum nor stretch any other thing, as I have made known to you in the treatment of the hiccups of the intestines; Then heal by the treatment of wounds.
Then heal by the treatment of wounds. And when you dress the wounds, so mend and heal the sore, until it is sound.
The abscess is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more helpful in this wound, and closer to salvation.
(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Many times is softened the skin of the scrotum in some men, because the testicles that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
and it is necessary when one wants to cure it, that you make the patient lie on his back, and grease the softened skin onto the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a seam, and if you see fit, sew off the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly.
Then grease between the seams and the cure as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Knows that chivalry is esteemed in our law, and therefore it pleases me not to speak of it at all in this book;
and it's only necessary for two reasons:
one is that the physician should know how to respond when asked about a patient, and know the remedy;
and the other, because we often have to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and horses and other animals.
I say therefore that chivalry is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by incision.
In that which we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed. then taking them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Of the correction of height: It is necessary that you tighten the thong, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspenders, and cut on each side to the point, when you have well scarified them.
and leave no boil nor small boil that is above the veins;
and this manner of correction is more effective than that which is done by rubbing, because at the rubbing there remains by chance something of the testicles, and therefore the beast desires lust.
then heal the wound until it is sound.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners in men: one being that between the two testicles appears also like the figure of a woman's nature, and it has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.
And the other manner is in women, and has on the finger as well as a member and two testicles.
And the care of man and woman is that you bind up all the wounds, and treat them as other wounds;
in the second way, men whose urine leaps through the skin of their testicles have no care.
The tumor is a wound on natural parts, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure.
You must temper the superfluity of the tumor with your hand or with aniseed, and bind it lightly;
and do not bind it too tightly, lest blood flows forth, then the care of another care until it is healed.
and to another wound that grows on the mouth of the uterus, and fills it, and by chance jumps forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and therefore they called it in olden times "cow's disease". It is necessary that you cover it, as we have said, with a poultice, and care for it until it is healed.
Abnormal is when the natural movement of a woman is not perceived, or the wound is small. and it is caused by birth, or an accident brought on by disease that has come to be;
and it is caused by birth, or an accident brought on by disease that has come to be; or it is caused by a hidden abscess, or a subtle or severe swelling, and occurs in the abdomen, sides, below, or wherever it may be;
and hinders conception, and childbirth, and by chance even having flowers to bear;
and the knowledge of this is through looking at the urine.
If the swelling appears close by, it tends to occur in the breast or at the side.
If it is a subtle swelling and it is close to the two kidneys, then hasten and do thus:
put your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, with spread legs;
then press the two kidneys firmly, until the subtle swelling is reduced, and stop any hemorrhaging;
Then take linen, and moisten it in oil, and place it on the wound, and let the woman lie at home each day, so that she cannot heal.
And if the abscess is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the swelling is from birthmarks, then suspend it with a thread and cut it;
and use medicines that stop bleeding, such as hemlock, dragon's blood, incense, together with an abundance of egg white;
then apply a bandage of flax cloth wide, so that the wound cannot heal;
and thus be for a long time, and apply a linen tent dry;
then be cured with other remedies until it is healed.
And when in the margin comes flesh-born origin, then it is necessary to cut according to this manner, unless it is enchanted abscesses. For the enchanted abscess that is in the margin, one must not touch with fire.
Of hemorrhoids Morose are openings of veins that without customarily, and when morose are old they become gangrenous;
and we have said in the section those that resemble them, and their signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deep within the rectum, and they do not perceive sensation, except by means of iron treatment.
Those that are at the entrance of the rectum, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house; next set the altar up with tongs, and cut off its roots, then powder on restraining blood medicines such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
then bind her feet to the appearance of an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if bleeding comes forth, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple peel and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply the poultice to her back.
And if it sets, it's good. If not, make her endure cupping glasses on her back and around the breasts without causing harm.
then take flax, and soak it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess is calm, so care for the wound site until it is healed.
and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so it must be covered as I have said with the turpentine. and then care for it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscess come from the mother, such as chancre and stone-like abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise of the warm abscess that comes on the thigh, which is not one of those abscesses that form beneath.
and if you want to know the operation of iron, then look and see if the abscess is warm at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red so that you can see it. Then don't hurry to pierce, but let it become calm until the pain is appeased.
and then make the patient sit on a siege, and have two little sieges where he leans, and support himself on his back and bring together his feet towards the parts of the leg.
and let his hips be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good band.
then bring the ball of the hand towards the right side, and administer the instrument with which one works the mouth of the marrow, thereby coming to its form.
and it is necessary that when you are about to administer this instrument, that you put in the first notch so as to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause harm.
and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument.
And when the abscess appears, and one works it with gentle hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, or in the pit of the left.
and when the bowel is empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moist cloths in rose oil or in green dry oil.
and put the cloth far from the wound at the bottom of the marsh, and put it above the marsh and above the clean linen cloth moist in water or when marigolds are cooked.
then the cure after two days of treatment happening thus, until he is healed.
and at no time remove the marsh and the wound by a poultice of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and Aristolochia longa cooked. Then returns to its mark.
And if the wound is set in the mare, then it is necessary that you take care not to cook with iron, but rather heal it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth It is necessary for the midwife to first know the figure of natural childbirth, and signs when you see the woman go downward and desire to push.
Then the child hastens to emerge forth quickly. Then you know that this childbirth is according to natural form, and the issue goes out from under its head, and the afterbirth with it.
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her belly, so that the child may come out quickly.
For when it descends upon its head, then the afterbirth comes with it, and the mother is relieved of her superfluities by good purging.
And this which comes in another way does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes upon her feet, and comes forth from the body or the shoulder, or hands, or above her belly, or in some other way, and is turned by chance about her neck, and by other bad shapes.
It is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should assist him.
If the child comes out of its natural birth and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of her are weak, then make it sit on a stool or have women hold it;
and raise its natural strength with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then pour the bailiff between its thighs the small spatula which is the shape: and split the umbilical cord, and cut at his navel until the moistors that are within come forth;
and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesame;
then let him take a pinch of conditio and sniffle, and hold his mouth and nose shut for an hour: if it is now the infant's turn.
And if both hands are swollen, then you should gently rewrap them little by little; and if they cannot be put in, then the woman should sit on top of it and lift his feet up high; then set the seat down to the ground, and hold onto the woman so she doesn't stumble while getting up;
and if the hands cannot be put in and the infant is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that was placed before, extract the child, and rewrap equally.
of the exit of the child from its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, it's necessary to stand it up high; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
Then take four fingers and stretch them little by little.
Can it jump just to the crotch, if it is commanded to take in, and make it protrude with conditions? if it jumps forth, may God will.
And if it is not further as we have said, then turn it piece by piece until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is easily so.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, take mouseberry from the above, and oil of sassafras, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar. and put it on the nature of the woman inside and make the poultice come forth, then let her sit in cold water down to below the ribs.
and when she is moistened below, put a clyster of myrrh on her, and put it underneath, and let her stay for an hour. then let her sit on the stool, then make her protrude and hold her mouth and nose, and gently massage her belly, for the child is jumping now.
Of the issue of the child between its knees When the child comes in this form, so he puts his small hands on. then let it be supported on its neck, and the feet hang down below, and let it sit on the bed. and fold his small hands and then takes hold of them on the belly, and removes the pillows underneath, until it is ready below. and if the child does not jump, then take his feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in. and warm the child slightly. and instruct the woman to take hold of it until the child is born.
Of the issue of the child which comes forth with one arm hanging down It is necessary to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and raise her legs well.
Then administer the muscle relaxant that I have mentioned;
and if it does not deliver, make her sit on a stool, then study how to bring back the hand; and birth it according to natural form, and make her lie down, and command her to take hold of what comes out as long as the child is born.
Of the issue of the child on its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. it is necessary that the midwife takes her hand, then turns it little by little, and pulls gently;
and when it is even, put on the natural muscle relaxant of aloes and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a stool and command her to take hold; and make her lie down. of the same manner for all the secondine
of the same manner for all the secondine When it comes forth in this way to the entire afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with one finger, until the moistures are empty;
and if the child's hair grows on his face and neck, so it will not be contained, and the child will die.
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as is fitting, and instruct the woman to hold still sometimes.
Of the issue of twins Know that twins are often born, and sometimes four or five. and this is not an unusual thing, it happens often. Two are a strange thing, and do not live if they can be named;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live if they can be named; I know that they will multiply, and are torn apart by the one who divides them, which is tied to the mouth;
and sometimes they issue naturally as do all others, as we have said.
If they sprain, then apply the cure as we have said, and if the swelling is subtle, make what she does quickly and lightly. and do so in the way that it is worth for salvation. of many children
There are times formed in the months I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like an infant by the measurement of glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the swelling knows all these things, for sometimes similar things happen. and do so as it is fitting.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman after a stillborn or miscarried child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to perform manual labor; if it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of good virtue, and has no accident or is not afraid of death;
It is necessary that the woman be vigilant on her back, and have her knees inclined downward, and her legs lifted.
and the midwife should be present at both parts, where she is tied to the bed so that she is not exposed to the descent of the child.
then smear the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these poultices.
then put it in the mother lightly, then let her bring up or push out those things that are convenient for this, and take care if the child is born with its head descending.
if the things are fixed in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or beneath the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then fix or prick it at the sides or near the midriff.
et it behooves him to hold the ligature in his right hand, and place the bandage between the fingers of his left hand, and tie all around his hand lightly, and fix the ligature in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then fix it opposite to the other ligature, or if you have a third one in need, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, so that it may come out, and let the ligatures be firm so that they may hold, as is its form:
And if one part remains, then anoint the bail with some of its fingers with oil, and bind it in that part, and pull the other part;
and if it remains there, then place this ointment or higher up, and do so until he gets out of there completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return because of constriction, then it is necessary that you wrap something like a cloth around it, until it is completely out. then bind at the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and thus it is necessary that you do so in the other hand, and with both feet.
And if the child's skull is large and it protrudes in the issue, or it has a sharp point assembled, then it is necessary that you push the spinebone between your thighs, and make the head and extract the water. or you temper it with the instrument which is called "almidach", from which the form comes with instruments or chapters that are after this one.
and thus itself makes the child to great natural height;
and then pull on the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out and it resists by force, so that they are split, until the moisture that is in the back comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as far as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce until the moisture flows.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is also light.
And if it is strained in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you strain it out at the end of the cloth wrapped around your hand; and make the belly or the chest until the moisture that is in it flows.
and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, then thrust your hand into the cleft of the mare's jaw and pull it up to the mouth of the mare; Then he inserts one needle or two, and trains them.
and if the mouth of the mare is narrowed due to abscess which has come there, then it does not need to be worked on, rather it needs to be treated with wet and green things; and the applier applies ointments, and seven in a liquid softening and moistening.
And if the child is on its side on its back, and you can place it even, then treat as we have said for a living child;
and if one cannot, then take apart by pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, then treat as we have said for abscesses that come in the mare;
and if bloody discharge comes out, let it be put in cold water to constrict, and apply other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose womb had borne a stillborn child, then she consulted another one on top of that, and rejected the stillbirth of the other one. After a long time, an abscess came to her mouth and swelled so much that it burst open, and began great trouble.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not find a way to heal the wound.
I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I was very astonished, because the womb has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a stillborn child.
I sought out the wound, and by means of fingers, so many bones, until the woman was in a better condition. and the woman remained for a long time thus, and afterwards there was some pus from the wound.
and I have not forgotten this chapter because when the master finds a foreign thing, he knows how to put it in order.
Hereafter comes the form of the prescriptor, to which one refers books;
and at two turns to two heads of two lines. However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the wood should be one foot two inches wide, and the border of the trees one palm and a half long; and between the two lines there should be two joinings of this same wood, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and this two joining are fitted in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, with its subtlety and lightness similar, is to be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pincers; and have two joinings, just as you see, one palm long and two widths broad;
and when you see the mare open fully with all the instrument, make the woman sit on it, legs spread and feet apart, then insert the two joinings together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand on all the instrument, just as you have made the pincers equal, according to the quantity that you see the mouth of the mare open, until the balance makes it do what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted above, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been prepared, the work is done more quickly, and people are taller on account of their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to retain her urine, and then make her open her bowels, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of this, well it is.
If not, then I take a poultice and make a cover or a lid, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, rue, anise, and centaury. all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or steeped in water over the fire;
Then put a rope or a pipe of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and tie it so that the vapors come inside the mare.
Then make her belch, as we have said. If the secondine starts quickly.
And if she remains after this treatment and is not fully recovered, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or with mastic made from althea, and then pour it into nature, and apply the liniment. and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the mare does not struggle with the extraction.
but make her move slightly to the right and to the left, and then pull. so it will come out and be released.
And if the mouth of the mare is closed up tight, we have said the treatment for belching and fumigating herbs.
and if she is not of all that we have said, then beware that you do not proceed foolishly;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marriage bed, you bind to the woman's lap, then poultice her with four-herbal ointment; if she will recover and be restored, and then it will come forth;
but always, when she recovers, a foul smell comes to the stomach and head, and wounds the patient. So it is necessary then to prepare acceptable fumigations for these:
none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is this:
And it resembles seeing a chain, and one puts the head in a subtle manner according to nature, and the large joints above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the lice until they are exhausted, and start another.
Many children are born who do not have their fontanelle pierced, instead it is closed by subtle scissors. then it is necessary to have the nurse pierce that scissors at its due point, and not pierce by spatula-like sharp thing, and secure the grip so it does not touch him.
then put on a moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put a perforation of cloth in the wound, and let it stay for several days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes this stoppage comes from a sudden wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that stoppage: if it be cured, as we have said of the gout in the toe.
Fistulas that come from under the fontanelle are nodulation, and grow more than those that come from above the fontanelle to go out, or in the space between two parts, if there is one fistula or more;
and when that swelling is old, it works and brings forth moisture with white or subtle pus, and sometimes these boils are pustular.
and they are known by this that he evacuates or throws out or ventilates when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance jumps one up.
And if these boils burst just at the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and arrive just at the seam of the groin, and just to nothing of the knee.
And thus one knows that the pustular boil is at the fundament, and not non-pustular. and it is that you thrust your two middle fingers or fundament, and thrust a fine needle of iron or steel into the boil when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then insert a small, thin cloth or a horsehair into the boil, so that you feel the cloth or hair with your finger.
and if you don't feel it, and it doesn't come with a blow or gush of wind or vapor, as we have said: know that it does not pierce. if you hasten the healing.
And when the fistula is pushed through to the bladder or to the urethral passage of urine, and the urine leaps forth, and cannot be sewn together by medicine.
If it pierces just to the junction of the hip, then the tendons come just to place. if there is no twisting and the invention of pain around it, then it is that he becomes worse again, and it's not worth medicine or sudden application by anointing.
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and the vanity of foolish mirrors that interfere with them.
In one that is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proved, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and he lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his hips inclined towards his belly; then put a layer of clay, or of plaster if there is tortuosity, as much as you know the tent's shape.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you should place your two fingers there, and if you sense that the tent has pierced;
and be uncovered where you feel between your finger and the bone or flesh, then know that it is puffed up; if you don't work on it, it can't be healed.
It is said that some can indeed be healed, but this is rare;
and the aid you make there is to cauterize the subtlety according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and make the poultice all hot in the abscess, until it comes to the foundation. and make them twice or thrice, until you know that these charred emendations are burned, which are similar to a bird's feather.
and then apply the moist poultice in butter, until that charcoal comes out loose, and then apply ointment smearing on and binding.
If he is healed thus, it is well.
If otherwise it cannot be healed;
and if the poultice gets in and does not pierce all the way to the foundation which is at the bottom, and there is a thick covering of charcoal or sycamore bark between your finger and the poultice, and you see the abscess under the covering of fat. if you cut from the beginning of the abscess and apply it again before the poultice, and then perform the cautery afterwards, until it comes to the top of the poultice. and will be delivered the tent, and will fall;
then remove those charred remains that seem like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
And if the blood flows forth, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
For the fire cautery assembles two things: to wit, the burning of those charred remains, and the stopping of blood and the drying out of moisture;
then the healer of wet tents shall mix in honey or crushed gallnuts until the wounds flow freely, and then throw away the burned remains in the bowl;
then heal the wound of the pigeon's flesh which is drying out and hardening, and are the dry remedies.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
And if the fistula comes right to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then put your finger or fingers on the fundament, and feel what's inside.
If you sense the tent and between two is the cloth or the suture or char, where it is about to burst, unless there are only sparks of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
You cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bone, or if you can, put tents and cure as first.
and don't go too far in depth, lest you cut the tent that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come out involuntarily. then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; by chance if it is healed, then remove that covering and clean the area then since it has been cut near the foundation, or by tent or another appointed instrument. then cleanse thoroughly that flesh which is in the wound as long as you can. then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation.
then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation. if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And never are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you set up the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation near the skin above, so take a stitched tent at the top according to this form: And I put one twisted thread in two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced on the margin of the foundation inside, then take out the thread from that perforation, so that you set up your tent or foundation;
and pull the head of the thread, and put together the two ends, and hold one to the other, and let it stay for one day or two;
and restrain it occasionally, until the threads break that are between them, and split open;
then heal the wound as long as it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too far inward. For it does not behoove to make a hole so deep and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spathula with a pointed end, used to make the fistula, is somewhat curved from one side and tapers; and on the other hand not, because one does not fit what one should not fit at all, as you see here:
There are two kinds of morbidities: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in between there is blood, and there is one or more, and they go beyond the foundation and to the top of the foundation;
but those that go beyond have a little moisture, and in between or a little yellowish water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the cure for those who have them within the foundation is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to pass water in a chamber, until the foundation empties itself, and it appears as threads; then you hasten, and hold it with pincers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut into its roots;
and if the ligaments cannot hold them because of their moisture, then they take to the cloth, or to cotton, or to a piece of cambric. and extract them from your shoulders, then cut, and powder with some hot powders that are in place of cauterizing; or you cauterize them as is said in the book of cautery, then cure other wounds until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, then purge the patient with a purging and bitter enema to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it may come out openly. if the patient becomes congested, and if the filament is too far from the foundation, then the cure is gentle;
if the patient becomes congested, and if the filament is too far from the foundation, then the cure is gentle; and it's that you grasp them with your fingernail or pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron. If you must bring together the stitching according to this manner:
If you must bring together the stitching according to this manner: Take a twisted thread, and put it into a needle, then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread below the needle, so that it is of moderate width;
and pull the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and draw out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to stop excess bleeding.
then put a moistened linen foundation in olive oil or cerote on the foundation, and command the patient to rest;
and then let it be until they bleed, and when they have bled, then anoint them with ointment and other remedies, until they are healed.
of the drying of the flesh or foundation Many times it happens that the flesh dries in the intestine, and through natural constriction, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help. It is necessary that you scrape away the outer layer with a spatula or your fingernail at the top, which does not allow it to become moist. Then treat the patient as long as it is necessary.
and if he cannot be treated, then start cleaning again more strongly than before until he heals a little and is scrubbed clean. Then treat the patient until he is healed.
of the trembling Fomace is a small imperfection located before the chest, and it goes very deep.
and at times the truth reveals to him a feeling of coldness, and he feels it just like being dead from fright, and it comes throughout the whole body, more so in his hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from an owl's feather or a strong goose's feather, and place that quill on the fright, until the purple circles appear all around it. Then turn your hand around the entire quill until you go all around the fright, and put it deep inside, and root out the fright from its roots.
And if you see fit, do so with a file of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and drawing above. Don't pierce, but hold fast to two, and press tightly.
And if you see, then cauterize the tremor, as it is described in the preceding chapter on cautery.
One never makes a poultice of silver or of archaut, or of melted iron or cloth.
and one never makes these small and large instruments, according to the way they are prepared. Those therefore which are presented in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Those therefore which are presented in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the purgative, small and great, is thus broad, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and it has a deviation or the intestines are twisted, as you see, and the head is pierced within.
and it has two perforations on one side, and one on the other.
and it has the intestines or a membrane that holds medicines in the bladder of an animal or parchment, and is pierced all around by small perforations, and has between each perforation one's width, then put into these perforations a strong thread of twisted wool in X or nine turns around, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then cleanse.
and that is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the instrument with oil or egg white or something similar, then fill it slightly. Then the minister should press it with both hands together until it is fully absorbed, then remove the instrument and lift the patient's legs slightly upwards, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it be as long as it can. and if he sleeps a whole night, it is more helpful.
And if you purge him in the disease of windiness of belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then continue purging until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then the instrument should be as subtle as for a child.
and that is the form of the subtle instrument for when the skin is stretched:
We have said about the treatment of wounds in the division.
Or we will tell you the remedies of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where or what kind of wounds are made, and how they are made.
The things through which wounds are made are by striking with stone, and cutting with sword or dagger or spear or arrow or similar things.
or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the breast, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head, simple ones, because the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from striking with stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of an abscess hot: if it heals soon from the cephalic wound itself, and there is little blood from the wound, and the healing takes place on the contrary side of the injured part;
and instruct the patient to be replenished with wine and large meats.
And if it does not heal, then reduce his meat, and let him not drink wine, nor eat flesh.
and place a poultice on the wound, if an abscess forms, using a moist cloth in rose oil only, or in vinegar.
and if there is no hot abscess, then place powder on the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and not dried by air or powder that I will say a little later.
and if the heat has dried it out, then apply some salves until it is healed.
And if the wound is great like a cut from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, just as I will say about wounds of the belly, with suture.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and it bleeds, and holds on only by a thread, then close it. Then treat the wound with medicine and restore flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as roasted testicles and wheat, also fowl, and similar things.
And if you find putrid flesh that is not attached to the bone, then cut out all the putrid part and pour away the pus, then treat it.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be staunched by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it severed, tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you must put this powder which makes it stick even when the fire has gone out.
And the manner of the powder is: take a part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; take three parts of calcined earth, and mix the powder finely, and fill the wound, and hold it firmly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it stay undisturbed, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medication until it is healed.
And one does this with quicklime alone, whenever one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but the air has moved the wound.
And if the fire has dressed the wound, even when it was already closed, do not put this powder on it again;
but apply some digestive unguents, or poultices made of barley flour and water with honey, until it runs clear; then the healer will attend to other wounds until the patient is healed.
And if a bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle forceps.
and I will tell you later about breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, with no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nail, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything restraining, for it harms nails and causes them to recede. and put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of nails is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soft, as if chalz were washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and wash chalz also in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist anointings.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she is covered and full of pus, then pierce or go lower.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes forth, then bind it, and tie it, and cauterize as necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the cords, and the conduit is preserved, then so that the flesh may go, sew the cord above the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then restrain him gently, and let him be for some days, then treat him with ointments drying until he is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then scrape it. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound has healed, and is cleansed and closed up at the opening.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it's a blow from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of inflammation near the wound so the patient does not die. know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't put powder on it at the first hour nor bind it with cloth to stop the blood that doesn't congeal in depth, and come back to the heart, and kill the patient. but I put on attractive oil, and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have oil, then put old cotton in the wound to suck up moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. If there is no convulsion, nor bad trembling of the heart nor stretching of limbs. And when you see good signs, then know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with tenting and other treatments, until he is healed.
And if it cannot heal or recover, then know that there is a fistula.
If the treatment is as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or deeper in front or behind, then treat the part that is in front. If it is great, by suture;
and if it is small, by powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken off pieces, then close the wound, and treat the severed parts. and if they are not separated, then leave the wound to purify, so it will ease the extractions.
and for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is made just as we have said.
from bursting of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and middling and small.
from a great wound, sometimes the intestines jump or the membranes of the intestines, because of which there is obstruction from them.
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes it's worse than a small wound, because of which one puts in more pins into the intestines gradually, rather than putting them in hot then cold.
because the intestines swell at once when they feel cold, so they put in more pins, and because of this, it's more suitable for a moderate wound, because one must reposition the intestine to its place as with other two.
And knows that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common wounds happen in the wound of the belly, and the wound of other parts of the body and two other proper wounds are common to other wounds.
and yet they are more proper with the wound of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is forced out, and gentle things are to be done to restore it, this is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed from cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: soak a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in water with cypress, spikenard, and spurge, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed.
and at times this wine restrains, and is good for loosening.
And when you see the swelling departing, if you moisten the intestine with water or hot and cold liquids, because through this the entrance is made to receive little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is better by cutting, so that no one should cut without great necessity there is;
and this is the instrument to split it:
if you cut inside the curvature and do not remove, and see where the shape is; And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, so reset it to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is of no use.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; et selle is in the part below the belly, so put the head and breast higher than the parts below, and also if there is an ulcer on the belly in one of its two parts, put your attention to what the wounded part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to remember what I say about large and small wounds.
Small wounds put what is apparent to you, then have the minister pitiful who holds all the ulceration in his hand, and sew together the lips;
and it is the common manner of sewing, and that you take one or more needles, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave a space of about an inch at the head of the wound, and drive in a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce the two heads of the leather with the two heads of the siphac, which is below the leather inside, as far as you make it pierce from that part, and sew together the four ends;
Then the strain of a doubled thread around the needle's two parts, then assemble the two sides of the wound properly, and then leave them with some space, and fix another needle.
Then tie the double thread like you did the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to how many needles you need, until all the wound is restrained.
and let the needles be moderate, between fine and thick, for fine needles cut through all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore they should be moderate.
and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the healing.
and then cut the threads of the needles, so they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and put tents or cloths on the needle's sides to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it requires one or two needles.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you assemble the two edges of leather and the two edges of silk together with a needle where there is one strong middle thread.
and when you have pierced these edges all together, then take the needle out at the part where you began, in the way that one sews cloth.
and put a spacing of the thickness of a minor denier between each stitch.
this stitching was used by a man, and I sewed up a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm long and wide, and it showed the intestines two palms long and wide, and the wound was inside the belly.
I brought him back the intestine when it had been gone for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up just until 15 days, and I cured him, and he recovered.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and did not treat him with ointment, for I was in the place where one could not find it, nor any medicine. and placed a piece of old cloth on top of the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle and pass it through from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the layer correctly in a straight line, then take the end of the thread or suture where you put the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part.
and the intention of this stitching is that you sew as pelterers do with furs, and that you leave once the suture on one side, and then pick it up again on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen says is proper, is as some do, who bring together the two parts naturally, and apply one of the chief ends to the other chief, in this way:
thread an needle or chief end with a nearby thread, and make it pierce only that one, and leave the two ends of the suture. then turn the needle, and make it pierce through from the outer part to that inner one, into the two ends of the suture.
then make it pierce through one and the other from the outer part to that inner one, into two other threads of the same material that are on the other side.
and this is the second manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen says that this is his word, and others testify to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each one.
and one must thrust one needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew hides.
and know that when the rupture is in the belly, then the stitching is more grievous than at other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and as if the fire had moved it, then put in again the intestine, and the sew.
then put on powder to draw out the flesh, and as if the fire had moved it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals. and cut the thread, and sew up the sides, and the membrane. then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed.
et if you do not have medicine so apply it immediately when the boil starts to ooze pus and cotton wool and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, so it is necessary that you moisten linen cloth lightly in oil of temperate heat or in rose oil and put it around the edges and beneath the shoulders;
and if he feels pain or itching in the bowels, and it often happens, so clarify them with black wine vinegar, and similarly if the itching comes as far as the intestine;
and probe it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the barrenness of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity to its nature of things.
And if the suture springs from the wound, so set it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned green or black, then you should tie the part that is black, so that no bleeding comes from it, for there are veins and arteries;
then cover what is between the tie, and place the two ends hanging from the part below the wound until it reaches the end to facilitate extraction when the sutures fall off, and the wound will close.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is rent and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men, because I have seen one man who was wounded in the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from there came the evacuation and flatulence;
I applied a cure according to what I knew, and did not stop refining it until he was healed, and the joints were strengthened.
And when I saw him mend, I doubted that the patient had badness in his belly; and it was not so, but rather he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experts said that when someone has a small wound in the intestines, it should be treated in this way: take fresh figs from large testicles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the fig has opened its mouth, put it on the two lips so that it stretches its mouth out;
and then cut off the top, and it stays so that he cannot separate, then put another fig after in this way as before, until the wound is completely covered; and cover the wound.
If the head is stuck in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
take the head of this thread from intestine that is very worn out, and then tie it to the head of this thread a thin linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset in its course.
and this manner of sewing is not different from according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or health, except subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes infected, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it bursts open and flows downwards.
And a fistula is according to the greenish nodulation hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and it is also curved like the feathers of a bird.
and sometimes in a clear arch, and other times dense; sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and has no flesh, is only due to one of the nine causes: it is to know, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because it has hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much bowing; or the skin is rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because of the property in the region it delays digestion, and delays health, and inflames by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for a fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the scrotum, or the intestine, or the bladder, or from some of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and if one comes to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
And all fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous sanitation, and there is no remedy but surgery, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come just to the place I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, then take a tent of iron or earth, if the fistula is straight, so as to cut it;
And if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of plug, because the plugs bend in accordance with the twisting.
And if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, because the moisture is so short from one perforation to another, and purify.
Then proceed with bleeding to your ability, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and cut deep enough, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press his hand with yours, and where he feels it.
And when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and take away the foul humor and corrupted flesh that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu'elle soit sanee
and then apply ointments to unbroken skin as long as it remains unbroken;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If vein or nerve does not wound or main members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the corrupt part as long as it is all removed, then treat with ointments to unbroken skin as long as it remains unbroken;
and if it is not healed, and returns bad as before, know that you are not yet quite done.
so uncover and remove everything until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then put back into place;
and if it is thus healed, that's well. If so, know that the corruption is too deep to advance. if there is no other remedy than to rely on nature alone;
and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can pull it out with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for the case; and if there are many bones, then extract all of them, without leaving even one.
and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, then cut and remove the moist and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place the wound thing to putrefaction, and let it rot around the bones until they are rotten, and then they will be removed more easily.
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackened part is removed, and then restore the wound.
and if there is a large part of the corrupt bone, it comes just to the point of the bone; if it is necessary to scrape and cover all up to the corruption, and then cure until it is sealed;
and I will tell you about an abscess that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the matter came out to his leg, and became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to hinder its opening;
but the physicians, due to their foolishness, worked too much above and opened the abscess, and there came out a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and there came out many pus-filled sores that all flowed with foul-smelling discharge from the body;
et many doctors put treatment around 2 years, and there was no skill in the art of hands, until I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what flowed through the pus into great flesh. and became red the flesh of the young person, and had a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent on one of these recesses, and then searched all the recesses, and found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the pus-filled areas until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption was coming to the bone inside.
I removed what appeared on the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except for what I had removed.
and began to treat the wound with medicines over a long time, and it could not heal.
and then I began again, and found the bone just as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I removed it, and thought about how to put the place back together. but I was not able to copy around a palm's width from the bone, and I pulled it back to its full length, then restored it with medicines; and it was healed and solidified quickly, and there was no need to resume the treatment except for the patient's weakness, which could not endure, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. Because for evacuation blood often poured out, but it was entirely cleared, and instead of the bone there grew a hard flesh, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or opposition from anything at all, neither in coming nor going.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be set in this manner: take a splint and strain it to the open end of the bone, and command someone to extend it upwards; and put another splint of coarse linen on top of the first one, and tie it to the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch the flesh upwards, so that you push the corrupt flesh down below, and uncover the healthy flesh at the level where you want to set the bone, which will not wound the flesh.
and put a iron or a wooden board under the bone so that it covers the rotten flesh;
and it is necessary to clean as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and clean again another time.
And if the bone is rotten and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh.
then put iron below, and then clean from one part to the other the corruption, and be sure to take as long as possible with the cleaning of the corruption, just as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the rotten joint, and clean the bone where it contains the other part;
and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then there is no other way than to cut out;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in the toe of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless it is necessary for you to investigate how it opens up; and cleanse it in all ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you;
and know that the incisors and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of their surfaces, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each type of work;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
The head can become dislocated either due to an internal cause or a external one;
and when you have medicine to correct this corruption through the cure of medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member up to its natural place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient may escape either death or the greater evil of the failure of the member;
and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards it becomes pale, then those corruptions spread from member to member, and take hold throughout the body;
if the hastening of the copper comes from the blow of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corruption is at the top of the knee, then it seizes hold and does not give space for it to come down to the hand.
And if it comes down to the hand, then it seizes at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes up to the arm, then it seizes at the shoulder;
and if it passes the shoulder, it is mortal, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue;
and thus it does when corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes in the first joint, then it cuts after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then it cuts all the foot; and if it goes up in the leg, then it cuts at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die of exhaustion;
and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is to bind it above and below, and stretch one minister's tie down and another minister's tie up, and you uncover the flesh that is between the two ties by a span or more wide, so that the bone is exposed;
then cut or sew, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the seam does not touch the healthy skin, and another wound and abscess will come to the patient.
And if bleeding comes from it when you work, then cauterize the area quickly, or apply some restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened at home in our land:
he had a boil that seemed like fire, and that ulcer came first on his big toe, until it covered the whole foot.
and when the man saw the ulcer, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed.
and after a long time it returned to the ulcer on his hand's thumb, and he came to me, and I put on him things that were reflective after the purification of the body, but could not stop the ulcers.
and he says to me I should cut off his hand and I do not agree that I had hope of reproducing the material; and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand he would not die, for the virtues of the man were feeble;
and he despaired completely and returned to his land and hastened to cut off his hand and was cured;
and I did not tell this story except in order that one may make another tail, if it is necessary.
Apostema often comes to a boil and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then breaks and punctures, and the pus jumps out, and the flesh remains empty, just as with an abscess; and the skin that is above is also subtle like delicate drapes, and does not reach as far as the bone, nor as far as the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain", and are not called "fistula";
but if it is so elongated that it comes close to the bone or through it, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure is that you cut all around that skin, and similarly when it is subtle, just as with flags; and is not harmed at all by its corruption.
And if you think the skin is damaged, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thickened with flesh, then cure it by cauterizing thus:
look if the breasts are large and the nipple that is in it has a foul smell, then cauterize with Egyptian medicine made thus: take asafoetida, and oil, and lard, equally, and put it in a vessel over the fire, so that the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take what is needed according to your necessity, and make it in water and honey, and in linctering the breast, and hold the perforation; and leave the medicine at work for two hours, then strain it out expecting;
do this many times until the breasts are freed and the pus is removed;
and at no time use water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of vine, and pour water on top, then let it flow, and in linctering, as long as you know that the breasts are well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then lincter with water and honey or add a little bit of litharge to it; You mix honey with wine that is sweetened, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the blood flow.
and when you have done this and have confidence that the body part is well cleansed, then apply a poultice to it that brings forth flesh in it, and take diaphanitic plaster, make it with rose oil and wine.
with some medicaments and ointments, whose properties I have said, for treating ointments;
and if the boil on the breast is small and the caustic cannot enter it, then enlarge it a little with an iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too large, then close it and leave only a small opening so that the caustic can enter; and if the boil that discharges pus is above, then cut or lower it to its original place.
and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, it prepares in such a way that the bowstring runs to its lowest point which is, when the bowstring is deepest, it does not leave room for flesh and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, it prepares in this manner so that the bowstring runs slightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bowstring.
so that the bowstring runs slightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bowstring. and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and be placed upon a linen cloth that covers all the wound. then cover the strong place around the wound of the breast if it becomes larger than the first, and be anointed gently with oil upon another cloth according to the size of the wound, and put it on the wound of the breast in order to loosen the bowstring, and do not remove the great cloth outside which after many days once.
and the one who is on the pustule of the breast, takes it often to remove the boil, and knows what comes out of the boil, whether it be venom or pus or enough or undigested.
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see nature bursting forth on the pustule of the breast, then know that the breasts are already hurt, and approaching health.
and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you remove the dressing, change to another wrapping, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not lose hope of health, for the healings approach.
For there are people who leave their wounds open for days in their sores, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested pus bursts forth from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healed.
et if the breasts delay in yielding, and are stretched out, so join medicines which are dry in substance and dry in virtue, as diaphoresis defines, for there is a great part of vinegar, and that is the last medicine.
take diaphoresis as defined, and make it with rose oil, and equal in substance to old wine.
then boil it and use it;
and do the same with honey cooked and thickened, when diaphoresis as defined is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey while it is on the fire.
and then pour it into the cloth, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes administer it to be drunk longly, and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour of vetches and centaury. and with simple or compounded remedies: crush them and make a powder and put it on the honey I mentioned and use it;
and if the wound is elongated and is not healed by this remedy, then know that the corruption goes deep into the bone, or makes a hard impression on the bone, or causes stiffening of the limbs; if the wound is of the type of fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the thumb of the hand or of the foot, or by chance arises in other fingers;
and when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then the abscess becomes septic, and runs and flows pus as long as it can reach the root of the abscess, and by chance may even run clear through;
and comes corrosion to the bone, so much that it brings stinking pain, and is the head of the shoulder wide apart, and is the colour flush.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must cut away all the excess tissue that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is very great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to prick, and to bleed, then it is necessary that you put the ray below the nail that pricks the flesh, and plug it up high, and cut away the remaining flesh subtly and lightly, and apply above the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all. then treat with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it away, and scrape off, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the shoulder bone corrupting, then cut it away as before said, and treat it until it is healed.
and if he is pierced, and bound, and feels great pain, then it is necessary that you treat him first;
then cut the angle of the spatula across, and beware that the cutting does not come right up to the skin which is below the angle, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then place something on top that soothes.
The bones which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshly, and by chance there may be one or two where there are bones, and sometimes a knot, and one of them is born at the root of the joint, or birth is in some of the fingers.
He who is born in any node of the bone does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the bone, by chance moves;
the cut of him who is fatty is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is grievous to cure: and holds you back from cutting.
In one who is born or should be at the back of the skin, it is necessary that you cut the flesh first to just above the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable string for this, then take care until he is healed.
The wounds that come from having to assemble come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
You must close that wound so that it can heal according to its natural forms. Then put between two tents or wet cloths soaked in oil of roses, so that they do not stick together. or you put between two thin pieces of linen, until the wound is healed, as it should be.
If a wound comes to any of its two with the palm, then cauterize that wound as it is necessary.
Vessels are large and swollen, full of melancholic superfluities, which come from many members of the body.
and it occurs more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, rather than others.
It is necessary therefore that you administer to him sometimes purging of gall, and then heal the wound with basil.
The cure for iron is according to two manners: one is to cut them and let the black blood flow. and the other manner is that you open the wound and let it drain completely.
The skin sores are according to this manner: The first sore arose on the leg of hot water very strongly, so that the thick blood is subtletized; then strain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee.
Then cut the vein in one place or two or three with a wide incision; then lift and pull out the black blood to your hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure without harm.
and then bind it, and instruct him that he should abstain from meat eating black bile.
and start the evacuation and purging again when the veins are full, and it will harm the patient.
The remedies of the heat are according to this manner: wash the leg of the patient, if it has many hairs; then put it in water and let the leg of hot water be applied until it becomes red, and the veins swell.
and if you don't have any bread, then heat it by the fire and then cut it in the vein of the long upper thigh or in the part below the ankle.
then open the skin at the incision and scrape away the vein from each side until it is apparent when you touch it.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white cord.
then bind the thread below until it is raised from the skin, and then let it fall to the incision lightly, then cut in another place above three fingers.
then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it by the thread, just as you did, and let it fall to another incision, just as you did first.
then cut another piece or several if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the joint of the foot, then pull and lift just to the second incision.
then pull it out by stages, until it comes out entirely, then cut it.
and if you cannot pull it out and lift it, then put a needle on the end of the thread which is strong and double, tie it and pull it, and place it below the rim, and turn your hand to one side and the other, until it comes out. and take care that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot pull it out or lift it, and it will harm the patient.
and when you have pulled it all out, then put moistened wool on the site of the wound in vinegar and rose oil. and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it unevenly, but do not cut it. and do so as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron that one uses to open the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it opens the vein.
and it is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is inserted in legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it is found in another part than in legs, and this happens due to the swelling that comes from under the skin, just as it comes inside the body with serpents and worms, inserted between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the onset of this swelling are that it comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then the skin changes, and the swelling begins to emerge forth, like a root of a plant.
When the swelling appears, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth one and a half Zs long up to 2 Zs, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it stops being so, wrap it around the cloth, and tie.
and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root until it is entirely removed; for if you cut it, then it will go back into the flesh, and bring about abscess and corruption in that place, and a bad disease;
for which reason it is necessary to treat it little by little up to the head, and leave nothing within the body;
and at times this vein is found when it is treated from the length of four palms or ten, and one man came to me whose was ten palms long, and when you cut it, it bursts or perforates, and is all released;
and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and administer to the place medicines in such a way as to prevent corruption from occurring again, then cure it just like abscesses.
And sometimes at this opening, many veins appear, and especially when it is opened in the joint of the foot or foot, and there comes much pus, and from which rain falls.
Heal then as we have said before.
vermin that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "disease of oxen", because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down through the body, and one can feel it well as it moves from member to member, until it bursts the skin where it goes, and jumps out.
and is caused by the corruption of some humors, such as those that come from worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or in the belly.
and one doubts of its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye. and these things happen often.
When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot prevent this except when he goes:
then it is necessary that you bind the area above and below with a strong cord tightly, then cut above and pull out, and if the flesh is pierced into the bone and you cannot get it out, then cauterize with fire on top until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it injures the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the cord tightly underneath, then cut above and pull out;
and it is necessary to use the patient in purifying the body with soluble medicines for bad humors produced, and to warn against eating meat that brings corruption.
of the pain that comes from windy weather This disease is called "vakirir" in our land; and it is a pain that comes to some members, and it can move from member to member.
and I saw those things that I tell you. I was called to a sick woman and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and afterwards, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm on the shoulder, sooner than anything, like bright silver when it cuts from one place to another.
the pain departed from that place and fixed itself on the shoulder, and then a little afterwards it ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
then she told me that it was turning around the body, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed how she moved like that from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. However, I had thought that many others had suffered from moving pain from place to another, but I did not see it, just as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a weak chest, and her veins uncovered, and because of this the constrained wind appeared;
and do not appear according to this reason for those who are sluggish, and who have moist chests and veins that respond.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then cut on top until the constrained wind releases its hold. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it in your eyes, then the cure for those who resist the winds is as foul pills and serpent's pills and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
The diversities of them are that some have great points, and small ones, and pointed, and soldered; and of those who have two angles, and of those with tongues, and of those with pieces;
and that which falls in any member if it falls according to two manners: or in principal members such as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, warns you: so you should beware of extracting this arrow, for many die after this manner; and when this bad sign does not warn you at all, and the arrow is not in deep, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits it and pierces the bone, and the skull above the brain is split open, is when there is blindness and swooning and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of gall. and perchance it lacks force of nostrils, or ears; and perchance it lacks the word and voice; and jumps from the moist white wound resembling pustules, and also jumps like a boil of flesh;
and if you notice this sign, hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not stuck.
The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and perchance the arrow goes in as well as pus, and with black blood, and comes with coldness and sweat cold, and fainting. know then without doubt that death ensues.
And the sign of the arrow when it strikes the kidneys is that without foam or bubbles it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and they sigh deeply and seek cold air.
And if the arrow hits in the covering of the liver, it is located near the small ribs; and gives great languor and great pain and sighs; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow shoots or falls on the stomach, by chance some undigested thing from the wound may jump out of the flesh.
And if an arrow falls on the belly, and no fragment of the arrow passes through the intestine route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine jumps out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain: knows that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the nape and the heel and the knee and the leg and similar members, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because of which you should act similarly.
It happened to one man that an arrow fell into the well or the root of the garden: I pulled it out and drew it from the other side under the fatty part of the ear, and he was healed without any harm.
And drew out an arrow that fell into the fatty part of the eye under the paper skin, and the arrow was lodged, and could not be retrieved except for the point going towards it, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, making all the flesh light without ears;
The wound was healed, and no evil accident came to him.
And he drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arab arrow with ears:
I pulled out the barbs, and made them subtle until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And he drew out an arrow from the man who had been struck in the belly, and thought that he was dying;
and then after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrowhead, and extracted it, and it came out, and there was no evil accident.
And if you find the man to whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrowhead remained inside him, and did not change his natural disposition, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound was sewn. and remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many others similar to these.
And he trailed an arrow to the king of the prince's man who was wounded in the arm, and was slightly declining to the right side. and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was summoned to the treatment three days after it had been shot. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for her in every subtle manner and did not feel anything; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put on the wound a plaster that is attractive and digestive, because the swelling did not occur. and I appeared the point of the arrow.
and I appeared the point of the arrow. I applied the poultice many days, and healed the wound above, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day within his flesh.
and he told me. I applied the medicine, a corrosive agent, to the wound by many days, until it was open, and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck in place.
then I pushed further into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and the wound healed well in its terminations for four months, and then it suppurated so that I inserted forceps, and pulled from one side and the other, and it could not come out.
Then I did not cease to refine and ingenuity of instruments, until I took it one day with well-made forceps, according to what its form will come in the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it, and restored the wound.
And the physician judges that nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was entirely healed.
I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot take it all;
but wise masters compare well a small thing and what is present and lacking, find nine works, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I pierces say that arrows do not come from the members where they are stuck unless according to two manners: or through the place where they enter, or by another way;
and that one that jumps out far from where it enters is an arrow entering the fatty tissues and jumping out sometimes now.
And if it doesn't jump now, then leave it until the fatty tissue is surrounded, and the exit is cleared.
and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then leave it like that for some days, and move it each day;
and then it jumps out, and if it doesn't, then pierce around with a very fine point until the fatty tissue around is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is stuck in the body of the corpse and cannot be seen, so search for it throughout the tent; and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it away until the wound is large;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that hold it in place, then remove the flesh that is stuck to two parts as far as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out.
and subtlety well, that you do not break the arrow, but rather draw it more gently.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the next day and pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the hemorrhaging of blood causes you opposition, then administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
and beware of the incision into the nerve and vein, and consider how you can draw out the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently;
and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow hit him, for that is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or it pierces something of its own, or the skin is inflated in that place as if you can see or sense it accordingly;
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out; If now jumps forth.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull it out.
And if she cannot come out, then leave her alone and continue the extraction until she comes out.
and if the arrow is still in, push it all the way in;
and if the arrow falls, and you need to administer treatment, then give her the instrument with the hair-like feature, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair-like part of the instrument.
and then push further, and if the arrow is pulled out, then insert the instrument with the entering point to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow hits the arm or leg or belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cover it up, then cover it.
and take care not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull out, and then sew up the wound if necessary. and let the healing continue until it is complete.
The shape of the tongs used to pull out arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look at this shape:
And there are many ways: large, small, and tiny, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is also like the feathers of a bird, to push forward at the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped thus:
There are 31 veins from which one can take remedy, namely sixteen on the head, to wit: Two veins that are after the ears, which are called "herbech" in pairs; and two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspirs"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is on the head of the nose; and two veins that are in the neck; and two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins which we commonly use for bleeding are V-shaped in each arm.
one is the cerebral vein and it is on the left side of the shoulder, and the common people call it "vein of the head". and the median one is called "femoral", and it is composed of the cerebral and basilic veins, and the common people call it "vein of the heart". and the basilic one is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the elbow, and it is that which bleeds, which opens manifestly above the armpit.
And the saphena is the vein which is between the ulnar and the annular, and it has two branches.
and in the leg and foot are three veins: One is below the pouch of the left armpit, and the second saphena vein that is at the ankle of the right side. and the vein called "nese" which is in the ankle of the other side.
and on the other leg are three veins below those.
The vein of veins that are after the ears so helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
and the quality of the binder is as I tell you, and it is that you raise the patient's head and stroke the place where the veins are with a rough cloth. then bind the patient's neck with a strap, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head. which then go down to your elbow, and where you feel the pulse below your elbow, it is said to be in order.
Then take the lancet, and thrust it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand above all the vein going up, and cut through the skin and the vein well twice as much as you must traverse, and make blood issue out so long as you see.
Then strain and tie it, until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The purging of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for migraine ancient and sore, and accustomed ophthalmia, and to the very old eyes.
and the quality of the purger is such as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below your arm, and then raises his head;
Then lift the key above the vein at your two fingers' breadth, and push the lancet below, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you did in two other veins, and make sure of the blood according to your necessity.
Then release the patient, and place your fingers on the vein for an hour, then place cotton. and then bind it tightly, and let it be until it is healed.
and we have spoken of their cutting and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for old face diseases, and for migraine, and for jaundice.
and its quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this shape:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or other thing, and let two ounces of blood flow according to what you see; Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein so that it is bled well and not too much at a time.
However, it is not good if the bleeding is too excessive; and let it bleed across, because the bone is close, and by chance, the bleeding may be broken when it is subtle.
The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the armpits so helps the eyes, and the typhoid, and the rubella, and the oriol in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their health are such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting some ligament, as before;
then the wound, and let it be so that the flesh of the traverser is a little long, a little wide, because there is no fat. And if the flaps are thin, by chance they break;
then make a bandage of blood, as much as you need it, and then bind on cotton, and bind well.
The blood of the vein of the nose is worth to age, and to surfeited frenzy, and to diseases of the face, as headache and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old;
and the qualities of the blood are such that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his nose towards your left hand, and takes the thin flap long, and puts it in the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now.
and don't go too much by depth, and make a cord of blood according to your need, then tie it one night, for it is soon restored;
The juice of the two juniper trees greatly helps in the constriction of the spleen, and at the beginning of inflammation, and with many diseases, and apoplexy, and corrosion, and herpes, and sores;
and the qualities of the juice are such that the patient stretches their neck under one and the other, as we have said;
and the master being above the head of the patient, and the patient lies on one side, then open the vein a little bit widely, then tie off the blood temperately, or as long as is necessary;
then do the other side in the other vein, then loosen the tie, and hold the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and let him rest until morning, so that the wound may heal.
of the healing of books The humor of the veins of the lips above is helpful for ulcers in the mouth, and for the corruption of gums, and for cracks in the lips, and around.
And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I said. then turn the lip, and look at his two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the small black lines around them.
so then cut one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cut the thicker one on each side, and also make both veins above and below, for it is the same manner.
of the healing beneath the tongue The healing of the veins below the tongue is also helped after the healing of the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of a physician are such that the patient speaks between your hands before the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks down at each side into every black vein:
heal then one and the other, and do not go too deeply inwards, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm where one usually heals are healed according to two manners:
or in piercing through the entire flame of mercury large, or olive-like subtle as cutting through, and is called "ane-sil"; and they are large and subtle according to the breadth and narrowness of the veins. The form of the mirtin bandage is very well-known, and it is broad as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and flat with thick blood that appears, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of olive-like mercury:
and it is more subtle and finely pointed, and it is for bleeding the fine veins, or where there is fine yellowish blood.
The healing of the basilica, which is one of those veins, helps the diseases that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the breast, and at the belly;
and it is necessary for the healer to let blood, and to beware of the artery that is below. And if he severs the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and one must not be grasping at the flame, but cutting so as anasil.
And if the basilica does not open up clearly, then it is necessary that you compress it, and change another one; or you want some blood from it, or you let the vein bleed into the arm: it opens up clearly; and cut to the flame as anasil, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the wound, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm and touch the place until you recognize the pulse; then mark the location with a sign, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein above the elbow. and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery: then avoid it.
And if you see it flowing up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and place your hand above for a long time, then withdraw your hand if the blood ceases, as often happens; and bind the arm, and let it be thus, and do not move the patient's arm;
and let it stay still and do not move until it is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched, and it flows, and the medicines are not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it recedes. and stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of fig bark, and split it, and take one half and tie it well until the next day.
if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, then heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping is not grievous in many dispositions because of the small size of the wound and the force of the ligament of the arm.
The vein of the forehead is so fine that it treats blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the doctor to be wary of the nerve that is below, and if he probed too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and it swells up and the wounds become inflamed, and by chance cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you take away the pain with the instrument anusil. and shield the nerve by your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision long.
The vein of the cephalic side helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes.
and it is necessary to heal in the olive or myrtle inflammation, for it is the most safe of all veins, for there is no nerve or artery below. However, it is necessary to seek the lighter way, and do not disturb anything if it does not work the first time, and one tries again. and by chance the swelling increases in some men when it is first done, but it harms nothing.
The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
The first thing you should know about healing is that healing is not necessary unless it is to preserve health, and to prevent illnesses from coming.
and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: it is to know, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and one should heal at the beginning of prayer time in spring, and after eating in autumn and winter when the sign of fullness appears;
and one should heal on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The healing that is administered for diseases has no fixed time, but whenever there is need by day or by night, in all hours and at all times.
and it is not necessary to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying more than four months until the seventh. Nor should one bleed those who have passed 60 years of age.
And when someone wants to heal themselves, no matter how, it is necessary that he purges the intestines with a light enema, if they have many worms retained, so that the veins do not retain the harmful superfluities that harm the main limbs.
nor does one heal who is too fatigued from meats, nor one who is drunk, until they are sober, nor one who has dropsy.
and one does not heal after suffering from colic passion, and vomiting, and discharging of the belly, and frequenting a woman, and travail, watching, and fasting, and all that is in the body or by something of the arm or the flesh.
then subtlety the humors, if the blood is thick, by foods and drinks and by medications, if you have the power;
then between baths, if nothing hinders it, to subtlety the blood, and to heal the wound of the belly around the third hour, as we have said;
and keep guard that day from work, and labor, and lust, and similar things;
and be gentle and merry, and let the surgeon's hands be higher than that of the one being treated, and press on the arm two or three times, then release the bandage slowly, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
and then press on the joint with the hands, until the veins swell, and one can feel it;
then moisten the surgeon's hand with an old oil a little bit, then put his left thumb on that vein under the joint a little or where he wants to heal, so that the vein does not flow and fail when it is cut.
There are veins that flow as strings to the suture, and some that are full of windiness, so when one puts a flame on them, they shrink back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with those. And if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the surgeon be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens at the first time, it's good; If not, then it recommences again a little below or above that place with haste, if the swelling is not inflamed.
And if the swelling is inflamed and the patient is frightened, then leave it for a day or two and do not bind the arm: by chance an abscess will come forth;
Do not enter the bathwater; then resume the healing if it pleases him.
and if the puncture is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you see, so believe in that very same puncture throughout all the bleeding rightly.
and work quickly, however, until the place is swollen. for it often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, then do not resume the healing, and put a little bit of lard on top, for it lightens the body from blood, and is good in this place where the lard is.
and thus administer the oil in each healing that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing is done with treacle and balm when it is put on the place; If blood vessels split very finely when they are too large.
And if it comes to a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when it is not drained well except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put a moist sponge on warm water and a little bit of vinegar, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flows out of the vein, and if there remains at the place after some days any blackness or greenish color, then it will not harm him. and if you see, put on something with aloe or myrrh dissolved in calamint oil, plastered.
And many times there is an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilica:
then put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, then that swelling is bad. Therefore do not place anything on top of what we have said, for by chance without touching the artery;
but make it apply a plaster to dry so as to harden the place, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity of virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it come out until it becomes thinned. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and robust, and needs bloodletting, that one makes the wound larger, and the flaps wider.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let it heal slowly and often, and one should make it heal by cutting across, not piercing.
and this manner of healing is saved from disfigurement of blood and numbness of nerve, and it is worth more than the healing of length or width.
And to him whose body falters in the healing, it is necessary to give a moist poultice made of greengrape juice. If he is overheated, then treat with bloodletting three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, then mix beforehand the moist poultice in a sweetened syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he pukes blood, after a lot of blood has been released, it is necessary that he drinks a broth made from fat and a subtle aromatic syrup, and uses the other things we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to stretch out his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
And if he wants to stretch out his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or in 9 hours.
And if he wants to heal from another part, then he should heal on the second day or third.
For there is too much blood inside the body that is already overheated, and it brings on fever. so that one must bleed in great quantity, and widen the opening so far as to reach the palm of the hand. Since the earliest moments you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on their pulses as they recover, so that death may not come in the place of permission, and this happens many times when the caregivers are neglectful.
and it is not necessary when you see the arm untied and blood issuing a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon. unless it is bent, then let him extend his arm hastily, for this would be bad.
but leave him alone until he recovers a second time; or you place the tip of the flame at the point of the wound, until the blood that has congealed in the vein issues forth, and put on a poultice of silk remoistened in water, and press upon it gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it tightly until the abscess is calmed down.
And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, let him heal in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein inside the arm is healed in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the fomentation is red.
Then bind it gently, so that the vein appears well, then wash it now with water through the thickness, not with width nor length.
And let the abscess be wide, and let it be cleansed well near the joint of the hand, and if nothing can come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
And if it's in summer, then don't put your hand back in hot water, because you would put it more at risk than in summer.
And the bloodletting from this vein is safer for all other veins than there isn't an artery or nerve.
The bloodletting of the wrist vein on the right hand is worth to all liver diseases, and it's the method:
Stretch the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is emptied, if you can see it. and if the wound goes crooked, and you cut it all around all over, then nothing hurts.
and don't go too far inwards, for the nerves are beneath all those denuded of flesh, and then put your hand in hot water if the wound is frozen in the cut, and can't come out.
And when you have let the blood flow as much as is needed, then put oil and a ligature on the vein to close it quickly, and do this for each one.
The blood of the wrist vein on the left hand is worth to the disease of mice, and do it just like I told you for the right.
The wound of the sophene is worth all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the knees, and retention of fluids, and disease of the reins, and of the groins and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his wound is that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs it on the vein until it opens, and binds above the joint of the foot. and the vein is at the ankle, and from there above the foot many veins go.
then open the one that is larger or the one at the ankle, whichever is better.
And if you open the wound on the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are beneath, and let the wound go crooked also as when cutting.
and let the flames be annulled.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the salt fails at first, so it is repeated above a little, because the wounds are salty;
do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and similarly make the saphenous vein of the other foot equal.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its blood is worth to the pain in the groin, when it's for hot blood.
And the quality of his wound is that the patient enters or bathes, and stretches above the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, then let him bleed in all the ways that you can, and crossing. and it is worth stirring it up, because the wound is clean, and it is much responded to many men.
and it is worth stirring it up, because the wound is clean, and it is much responded to many men. And if you do not find it, then let blood flow from the area that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of nerves.
and make so much flow of blood as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and strain it. she is now healed.
Poultices are made of horns, or clay, or glass;
and the application is done in two manners: or by piercing and attracting blood, or without piercing.
And this poultice application which is without piercing is in two manners: or it is with fire, or without fire;
and the poultice application which is done by piercing and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body, from which one is entirely on the head. and the others are in the neck; and two others in both sides of the neck; and the poultice under the chin; and the poultice of the two shoulders; and the poultice on the sores; and the poultices between the two arms; and the poultices of the two legs; and the poultices of the two ankles;
and the blistering does not treat blood, unless it is small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore one has not weakened them at all, as one would do with healing of a vein; and it is not necessary for it to be administered, nor should there be any fire or sense of burning, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
And if because of necessity of diseases it is necessary to blister, or for habits, then let us administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time;
for there are those who, when they need to blow, have a heavy head;
and there are those who turn yellow and red on their face, and on their head, and neck, with dark eyes;
and there are those who turn a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who think they see things through the blood, and hurt themselves, and die, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The juice of the mummy so helps with the swelling of the head that comes to the eyes, and does not need to be done after the evacuation of all the body's filth.
and this blowing is in place of the juice of the cephalic, and does not need to be done by those who have a cold complexion or who have catarrh, for it would do them great harm.
and therefore it is not fitting for an old man to use them, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And one who often recovers from this becomes forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the ventous a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The ventilation within the breast is in place of the sainy of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is worth it for the constriction of the belly, and the tearing of the channel of the womb, and all that, and repletion.
and it is necessary to push somewhat less, because if she holds too tightly, it will hinder the inclination of the stomach and heart.
The ventosations of the two ribs of the breast are worth for the pains of the head, obtalmia, and emigraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the sainy of the basilica.
and you must instruct the surgeon to put his hand down when he makes the incision, that he not cut the artery, and let no flow of blood follow.
The windings under the jaw are worth a mouth disease, and a corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of sores on both lips.
The bleedings on the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The windings under the ribs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they take blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deep by fontanelle, because the layers are bare of flesh, and know below nerves and arteries.
The poultice that is on the buttocks is worth for hemmoroids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the poultice be large, and be of earth, because it has need to well draw; and by chance, if she were subtle, she would break; and it makes great wounds.
The poultices of the legs so clearly heal, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth the ancient pains of rheumatism, and of the kidneys, and of the bladder, and restore flowers;
and they are in place of the two soles and the two shins, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause faintness in many dispositions.
The method of applying the poultice is that you apply it first empty, and suck it timely, and put it in place hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the red and swollen place, and behold the redness of the blood.
then be fierce, and apply the poultices again, and take heed of the condition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: It is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and somewhat deep. and suck slightly.
And if the wound is large, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtend the way of the thick blood.
And if the wound is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time;
and when we want to draw out blood little by little, then we should stop after only one time. And if we want a lot of blood, then we often start again;
and if the wound is thick, then strike it deeply and stop when the edges are perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have hard skin and rough pores that you anoint the sores of oil opening and dissolving. If it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in winter, with lovage oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
And if the person to whom one applies a remedy has tender skin and large pores, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but rather to wash after the leeching with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain flower water, or another similar one.
And he who has much moisture, if he rises easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive swellings are lifted up with old wine, or with water of sycamore, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar.
and it is not good to apply a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
and it is not good to sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary for him to be warned when he should be poulticed and when he has been poulticed.
And beware of those who are healing and choleric, and whose skin is too tender and inflamed. It is necessary for him to take cold things, such as unripe grapes and endive and lettuce at ease, and similar things. and a little pepper, and fat of chasteron, and moist meats.
and a little pepper, and fat of chasteron, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup and aromatic wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and a little pepper, and a little pepper and small birds and partridges.
and the day when he will be sweating, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before sweating, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be thinned out, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The blisters that are applied without striking are those that are applied over the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and over the belly and the navel and the kidneys and the flank, for these members do not tolerate being struck on them, and it is done only to draw blood from member to member, just as we apply poultices over breasts when milk flows.
to remove the viscosity which is in the member, as we put bandages on the belly and on the breast to reduce the member;
and relieve the pain, when there is inflammation or piercing, if it relieves by its attractive virtue the inflammation, or draws out the pierce from its place;
and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these bandages are administered empty to suck up as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the eye, and in such a way one fills the bandage with hot water or with water that has been cooked with herbs suitable for this purpose.
The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
And it should be two and a half palms wide, and have on the border around the middle a small pit, like to put a needle in, and it should be of lead, smooth beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the member;
and it should have in the middle a piece of transverse earth or iron, to put a candle holder in place, and be both great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for children's poultices are different from old people's, and those of thin ones are different from fat ones.
And thus one should put this poultice on the limb:
take the candle holder of wax or linen and put it in the poultice across the piece that is in the poultice, so that the light be at the bottom of the poultice lest it burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb and you should put it on the pustule that we have said, so that when one wants to, if there is evaporation, and remove the poultice;
and take the linen again just as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
En la ventouse then which is administered in malady of pleurisy to all age nhas point de verge ne de pertus and isnt administered for more than when its full of water and is placed on the member only.
and it's the form
Sutures are not administered for more than in members where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts. and in areas stripped of flesh, such as skin or bone, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the suture is that when you find sutures that are in clear and pure waters without any disturbance, then take them;
and put them into fresh water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cleansed with wine and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sutures;
and when they are plain, and will grow, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then he puts it, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, then lift the joint slowly, and then with water, very well, and then bind it tightly;
and if the swelling is too great after the wounds, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top, until the swelling subsides;
and if the swelling is multiplied, then put it on top with crushed glass, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it subsides;
or put on the joint half a handful of peeled fava beans and let them be there until they dry out at the joint, and it will now subside;
and if you need more, then take other swellings.
And if the veins do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or insert a needle so that the vein emerges, and then put it on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will swell;
and when you see that they bleed, then powder on a small amount of alum and salt or ash, so they will cease now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fracture and dislocation.
Know well, dear son, that foolish men are led astray from this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read any letters;
and because of this reason is strange the science in our land, for I never found a good one;
and I know nothing except by the science of ancient books, or that which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and shortened it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are provided, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, summarizing the words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remaining on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and learn it from others.
I say that when breaking or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, unless some thing prevents you entirely, such as weakness of body, or children, or old people; or if the weather is not very cold or too hot;
and mild choler, that is to say cold humors, and joints of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor indulge in greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about a hot aposteme or spreading of matter to the member;
If the patient reverts to their previous management as if they had used it.
And when the broken bones begin to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that make thick nourishment, or if they have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and pork belly, and beef, and fresh fish, and good wine, and similar things. For with thick nourishment the breaks are repaired more quickly.
And know that the bones broken in old and decrepit people cannot be well reattached or joined according to their nature due to the drying out of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children.
but don't care, reset over the broken bone with strong clamps that bind and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before. and don't stop doing his work, and therefore he must nourish with thick meats, just as we have said.
And know that broken bones are diverse in many ways.
For the breakage of the head is one thing, and the breakage of the breast or leg another, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking. For there are breaks that occur with twisting, and others with bending, just like the cutting off of a quill to write.
For there are breaks that occur with twisting, and others with bending, just like the cutting off of a quill to write. And if it is a break with wound, and a break with a small crack in one piece.
And let each one have his own mind and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to its place;
and it is known that the bone is broken because the joint is twisted, and it becomes clear by probing, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor bruising at the touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no breakage.
but it can well have twisting, or a tear, or a small breakage. So do not move him with your hand, but put on the medicines that come later, and then strain him gently now.
And know that the breakage that occurs in an arch, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to bring them now to a point equally, so that abscesses do not come to life there.
and if abscesses come to life there, then let it be left alone for a day, until the abscess is calmed down.
then bring it to equal by degrees that you can gently and carefully, and know that the restoration of this is more gentle than the restorations of those who have pieces.
then hold it, as is fitting hereafter.
And if there are broken pieces of bone, and two parts, whether it is arm or leg, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or one string and your hand.
et set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, then reset by all means the additions in their places as soon as you can, and take care that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
and set the two bones of the joint according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it is not well.
so that it sets well and is not strained too much or pressed as those who bring about by their work an abscess to become hot and contractive to the member, as we have often seen.
And when the member is at rest, so chastise the patient well that he does not move it, whether he be awake or asleep, turning or in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. When he feels no pain, unless it is at the very tip, and it is necessary to put him in such a state that he feels no pain;
and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. When he feels no pain, unless it is at the very tip, and it is necessary to put him in such a state that he feels no pain; and make sure he is set straight, lest twisting occur when he is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are as I am telling you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: and it is necessary to envelop them in cloths of soft and subtle linen; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and strong linen, because the wide linens encircle all the great member equally, so that there is no defect.
then wrap it around with light cloths, three turns or four according to the member, and hold your hand a little bit on all the linen, then go above the breakage and strain less, so that the breakage may slightly move away from the breakage.
and soften it little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament and turn around again above the broken joint.
then return to the part below the break and tighten it moderately, neither too hard nor too gently, as we said in the first chapter above.
then put in between the ligaments strips of linen or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put on your well-made splints, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing for the abscess that removes the swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
then tighten on your splints, and they should be of the same width as a well-filled cane, or of ash wood which is used to make nails, or of palm tree saplings, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint which one puts on the break is a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
and be as long as it is needed for the member of small or great size; then bind on top of the splints just as you did at the first joint, then tie above with a cord accordingly, just as at the first joint over the break; the tighter it is bound above, the looser below;
and it is necessary that the cord be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of fine linen;
for if the cords are thick, like I have seen the works of fools who make their bonds with linens twisted in a knot, and that is great error, for the bond cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have less than two fingers' width between each splint.
And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after straining in their joints, then put beneath them strips of linen or shorn wool, so that he does not get hurt.
When the wound is with the break, and the ligaments are torn, I will say its treatment hereafter.
And know that it does not need to strain all broken limbs with splints on the first day. For when the members are great, it is not necessary to put in splints more than after four or seven days, or more according to your security regarding the abscess happening suddenly.
and thus is the manner of ancient plasters to restore breaks, dislocations, and twistings:
and it is that you take flour which stands against the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of plaster restoring a break to many dispositions, and indeed for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring the break and the dislocation and the twisting: Take aloes, ladanum, galangal, asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mix them in the proportion of ten parts. Mirre and aloe, to Z. Aloe of seven years. and make powder from it, and mix it with the juice of an egg. if a person's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of plaster that is worth for the twisting. Take mugwort and vervain, to Z. Mirre and aloe, to seven years. Myrrh of six years. Bolus of Armenian balm, to ten years, and grind it well, and mix it with water or the juice of an egg, and administer it.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones that have strayed from their places, and calms the pain happening, and the usage of bone, and breaking. Take a new linen, and marinate it in vinegar and oil cooked, and put it on the wound.
These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly removing the pains.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earth dandelion leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of a fractured bone and to ease the remaining abscess. Take the root of valerian, chamomile, flowers of violets, and flour of vetches, each a part.
and grind them together, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use.
Another way to plaster that is stronger than the first one, when a stubborn abscess comes during the restoration of the member. Take the roots of valerian, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and anise, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each a part. and grind them together, and mix with saltwater or sweet water or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything except a wax and oil mixture, and nothing more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, things slightly warm and dry, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to plaster that is good for a wound and pain: Take mullein and horse's tail, or hen's feathers, and wormwood, and pound them evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster and lay it.
And then loosen it slightly afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place. so don't loosen it by hand days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now.
and take light cloth, and wet seaweed, and plunge it in water, and lift up the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut until you are sure of hot abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member be, and the pain be removed, then the subtle bandage is re-applied, and a little powder, and do not strain it as hard as before; and subtly until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is gone and red, and pain and swelling are all removed, and you need to apply ointment and binding again, then do so, just as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, do not remove it for three days or four or five or seven. and leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the swelling subsides and approaches the bone surface.
then bind it tighter than before, and fatten up his flesh, as I said before;
and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that mortification cannot come there; then apply lukewarm water to the spot, every time you remove it, and let it stay for a little while.
by this work then a numbness comes to the member, and suddenly makes what foolish sages do, which leave the member twisted:
it is bad, and if it is a woeful work, I see nothing else but to give up and do things correctly.
There are many ways of breakings, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined;
for there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone just to the ribcage which is below the bone, as happens with a hatchet or fist; and for that reason this manner of breaking is called "hachure".
Where the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing, and this manner of breaking is called "absolute".
and it is the wound from these two breakings great or small.
And if there is an enclosed percussion, or splitting or cracking of the collarbone, or falling onto stone, or falling on top of stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent breaking which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that has been reunited with the bone as fine as a rabbit's whisker, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called "capillary" break.
and if the wound is made by piercing with a stone, or falling, or something similar, and causes the bone piece to go down, and is the hair-like fragments as blacksmiths do when they hammer on cauldrons; if the arrow goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist skulls, as that of an infant;
and it happens in all these ways of breakage where small pieces are dislodged, just like this one is; and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all ways of breakings by the pulling away above them, and the inquiry made by probing, and through the corrupt flesh that is on.
The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then the black breaking appears.
In the treatment of the breaking, take note of the patient's accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar conditions in many dispositions, then it cannot be cured without a doubt.
And if you see no unbelievable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day of the moon that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, lest the skin below the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
And if the breakage of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut the broken part thus:
et est that you take the chief of the injured patient, and uncover on the bone in all ways you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding comes to reveal the bone or abscess shows, then provide what is needed, and it is that you fill the place with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of there being no further bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done in two ways of work:
one way is that you clip at the narrowing in front, and it is shaped like:
And then put in another trimming larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have many diverse clipping points, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron steel;
and work lightly, so you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, it's necessary that you pierce around it, so that you can administer small blows with tareres, not too deep lest they penetrate further than the skull of the test, and there should be above the point a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
and you should have several of them, so that each one comes into its place beside the bone, so that you have tareres for all tests.
and this is the form of the three ways of tarers:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the tarer on the bone and turn it to your right until you know that the bone has been pierced.
then put the tarer somewhere else just a little bit further on, and do this all around, then cut off the bony excrescence that is between the protrusions, and make it as subtle and light as you can, just as we said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any of the instruments you have such as forceps, pincers.
and guard that you do not touch the brain or the spine.
and when you have perforated and treated the bone, it is necessary that you replace the apogee which remains on the bone with all other instruments similar to a chisel, but it must be more delicate and subtler than the other chisels.
and if there is nothing of small bones or scales left, lightly scrape them away with instruments. then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is more wholesome. and it is very strong, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the breaking appears moles; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, whose form is:
And do not cut from one side only, but the parts are divided into two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
Then strike with a small mallet above, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and take great care of the skin that is underneath.
If it is applied to the bone, then lightly scrape the bone, for one scrapes well without harm and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the skin, and the bone is scraped away only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and scrape off the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
Then scrape with great scrapers, and after with more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like cuttings and subtle breakings, it is necessary that you take care in accordance with its direction.
and this is something that is not fully understood by one who has put their study into this art.
And if the poultice is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another cloth, doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth. and make it as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the patient, then administer above the other joint, and do not strain it too much except until it holds the wound only;
and let it be like that for one or two days until the abscess is appeased, then unbind it, and administer medicines such as roots of lily, and flour of vetches, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar things;
and make powder out of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicines unguents without biting;
and see that the wound is soon clean, and do not leave it without salve, nor let it assemble into a boil, for when a boil assembles on the skin of the brain, they will run and burst forth, and cause great harm to the patient;
for when you put something biting on top of a scabby place. Therefore, take heed if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, which is doubtful without doubt.
And if no blackness comes from it except by the medicine you have put on, and that has such virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and mix one drachm with it. then proceed with the treatment in the manner of treatments that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes two bones above are broken, or one alone, because there are two.
and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, so it does not cause any further constriction or twisting, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your little finger or probe into the bone and insert that break into your finger's index, and push it gently forward, until the bone returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and watch so that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot be brought back to its place by the finger, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the top of a small rod.
And if the break is in two parts, then do so again, and hasten to restore the first part the next day, if you can.
if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has cooled down, then push the head of the bed to test the linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Or you push the other one from the other side, if the break is there; and let the tents be so big that they fill the holes of the bed.
And they said some doctors that one must smear tents with tallow, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with the concoction of hen's egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent in place until the bone is hard and the cartilages are hardened.
And at times one brings in or else puts down goose feathers instead of tents, and if there's a soft drapery around, and the breeze holds, and blows on the patient among. Or make the hole that you see.
And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working there, then put a poultice or damp cotton in rose oil, or in a small quantity of daguanion.
And if abscesses do not form, then apply an embrocation by the way of departure, made with semolina flour and incense powder, cooked with egg yolks, then put it on light poultices, and do not bind it.
And if the break in the flesh is small, and it's broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for that, then sew the gash, and care for things like char and soldering, as with suitable plasters and unguents for that.
And if there is no wound inside the flesh, then cover it with tents, and put in poultices of cloth, until he is healed.
When the jawbone is dislocated below, and there is no wound beyond, and the break is only as far as the coronoid process, and it is not broken in two, except for the coronoid process, then one can tell this lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you place your two index fingers in the mouth of the patient. And if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then place your two index fingers from the right hand, and press the fracture slightly inside, and apply it to the other hand by feeling, and make even.
And if the break of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you apply an extension of two parts, until it becomes equal.
And if the movement of the teeth has occurred, or a rupture, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and place a compress on the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it. and place a great staple well made, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it with force that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and feed him light victuals.
And if you see that the shape changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then reapply what has changed. and apply plaster on top, with mill powder mixed with an abundance of egg white or wheat flour, after you have removed the keratin.
and apply a thin layer of plaster on top, and if the plaster sets, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until they are healed. many times is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess breaks out, then apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, remove no part of the bone that has been taken out; if it is a subtle removal by instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by fire as needed.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then cover the wound, if it is large, and put on one of the plasters suitable for this, to stop bleeding, until he be healed.
The forceful break occurs many times in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
or it is broken and disjointed in two, with pieces, and this is the easiest to restore.
where there is a break with wound.
And the work is thus when there is a break without wound, that you have two assistants, so one holds the aid that feels the broken part. and the other stretches the cloth towards the part;
then set the break even with your arms, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor obstruction.
And if you need to stretch further, place under the patient's shoulder a rounded spear of cloth or linen, and make it as thick according to your necessity. and stretch and lift the broken part, and hold the spear in your hand, so that you set the break even as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps to the outside because it is deeply embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatreil, and puts a pillow under the shoulder; and have your assistants press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
And then direct the break to your arms, and if you find it deformed, so it is necessary that you cut above.
and strain the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, so cut it at one of the notches that you have. but put this instrument under the forceps to guard the suture.
and resemble a spoon, and is not shaved, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work.
and have two nails, just as you see, and one should be wide and the other narrow, just like the shape of the wound that you made when you cut the bones.
and when you are sure of hot abscess, then cut the wound, and if the shape is small or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
And if an abscess breaks out, then soak one cloth in rose oil and azime and wine, and put it on.
The wrapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put a plaster of mill powder and egg white on the bone, and put light bandages on top, and place a spike below the arbor, if you need it; Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put the cloth doubled on top of the bandages, and the plaster; Then take a thin strip of three finger widths in length and width, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage are even; And put the strip on the shoulder, and turn the bandage around the well part, and under the arbor, and under the ailing part; And reset each part, and when you see that the joint holds the shoulder in good order, and you clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligament loosens, then restrain it;
and make the patient lie on his back, and place him when he sleeps a small pillow under the headrest, to lift the aid in high. so that the break in the shoulder strap will be eased by aligning the shoulder, or you bind his arm to his neck, and do not release him unless bad events come to pass for twenty days.
then renew the plaster if you see that he needs it, and bind and leave him thus until he is restored.
and it is restored in twenty-eight days, and to some men even less.
of the break of the shoulder
It often happens that the shoulder breaks or swells greatly without bruising a single inch, and is only known to be hurt through touch.
so that the arrangement follows the shape of the break, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
Then put powder of the mill on the place with abundance of urine, and light bandages, and put a double cloth on top. Then put a wide and subtle iron plate on top, slightly larger than the shoulder, and under the plate are grooves in any place of the shoulder, so that the cloth wraps around the bandages evenly.
And then bind it tightly with a strong bandage, so that the iron plate does not move from its place, and observe it each day.
And every time he swells, bind it again, and put the iron plate back in its place if it has gone out of place, and have the patient lie on his side.
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25 days.
And when this number is complete, then loosen it, and be careful, for it is not bone that puts itself out of place easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and points under the key, then do so, and extract it, and do what we have said about breaking off an abscess.
of the break of the chest
The weight is sometimes broken in mid-air, but this happens rarely. but it breaks often at the end.
And when it is broken in mid-air, if it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all together, and by chance may vomit blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and knows not well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs of both sides to your hands, and carefully bring everything into equal alignment in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
then apply poultices and plasters above the delicate salt or another light resin, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move. and turn the bandage around to the back, and tighten it gently, and reward each hour with a little oil, and if it relapses, then tighten it.
et if it is necessary to separate, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and separate, and scrape off the excrescence, and address what has come forth in ways of cures;
then scrape off the excrescence, and hold it so that it is clean.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs does not occur except in very large men after the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend except because they are swollen. and it is felt well through an inspection as you should.
And the remedy is that you put it back equal to where it was, as it should be. And then apply a poultice, and bind it with an iron band, if you need to.
And if the breaking of ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and puncturing, just as from a pleurisy, for the bone pierces the flesh. and he complains of pains, and swells and vomits great abundance of blood, and that is from a grievous sickness, and the ancients have placed great art in it.
And if one says that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push back the break outwardly.
We do not do so, unless a hot abscess comes to be. And if it has come, then let it heal.
And they say some people put poultices on the place to draw forth strongly, and that is similar to reason; nevertheless, there is doubt that the poultice does not draw forth the excesses at the place because of the weakness.
And some of us say that one should cover the place with a wet cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put equal pressure around, then be cured through the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear by the bone that presses on the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the effusion.
and then one must cut the bone, and draw it out slightly, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until he is healed.
And if an abscess comes forth, then put wet cloths in rose oil on top of it and place them on the spot.
and treat meanwhile the place of that which is to an abscess, and be careful on the spot where it must be, until he is healed.
and also at the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you see that you don't know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, it does not feel anything.
Know that he is mortal in many conditions, and if they are numb and feel well when one tightens and pricks them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies treatment.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healed or not, if you notice that the feet are softened, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and evacuation without intention;
and when you have bound it on his belly, then there is evacuation without intention. And when he is bent over his back and wants to settle down, he cannot. Know that he is mortal. if one does not labor in his care.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is easier.
And the treatment is that you apply if there is an abscess hot, so put oil of rose or oil of hen's egg on the spine, until it is calmed.
Then apply one of the soothing and drying ointments, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
And if any bones are exposed, then it is necessary to cover them with a kerchief; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, and then treat it with ointment releasing flesh, until he is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the jaw", then take your pouch from your left hand and place it equal to your right hand's power, then apply the ointment and bandage on top, if you need it;
then restrain him, and if there is exposed bone, do the same on top, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the hip bone
It often happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it is, there is only a little shortening at the top. and makes it long, and bends downward, and comes to the patient with pain at the spot, and puncturing, and swelling of what is broken.
And the remedy is that you stretch out your hand above, until you are above the breakage. and know what the breakage is and how it looks.
and if the breakage is only at the top, then set that breakage in its natural shape, so that it is as before.
And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break becomes apparent to you. And when you have set it in its place, then put on the poultice, and then put on a bandage of wood or horn, and restrain the breakage, so that it does not move.
and place the bone below the ribs, until the ends are equal. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if abscesses arise there, do not touch them, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have said before. and then return to restoration, and bind it as is necessary, if there is no bad accident.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder aids is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the two manners:
one of which is that you take a fist-sized piece from the main growth, according to this form:
And tie with two knots, and lift it up, and place the patient on a stool;
then let the broken arm rest on the fist, until it comes to its ease, and have about half a cubit of wood, then lift it onto some heavy thing or let the minister extend it downwards.
Then set the mirror so that its edge is equal to his hands together, until the edge returns as it should.
And the other way is that one should bind the patient to his bedstead, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two attendants to hold each what is on the bedside table in their hands, and the other to stretch each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, so strain it below the skin, and above the skin, and extend each of the attendants to their part.
And if the edge is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put the strap in the middle beneath it, and the other one under the edge;
and also if the edge is towards the armpit, then it is necessary to put the strap lightly, without effort, until the edge is equal on the shoulder and on the armpit;
Then set the edge even as it should be, and hold it, lest apostemes do not come there.
And if apostemes come there, then do not hold it at all until seven days, and put a moist linen cloth on it in ease and rose oil, until the apostemes are appeased;
then the restraint is, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the plaster on the shoulder, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
and put a cloth, and strain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the shoulder a larger and stronger one than the others, with two inches of space between each splint, and have each splint so large that it passes over the shoulder three inches from either side.
then strain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the shoulder, more firmly and less far apart.
And if you see the swelling of the stars and the straining, as we have said, in the place where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the warm abscess, then let it alone until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then look at each one in three days, to see if the swelling subsides and does not increase or become inflamed, and if the numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If it addresses itself, as we said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not loosen it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
and put under the shoulder a soft cloth of wool, evenly spread out, and look at each hour of the day or night to see if the shape of the broken member does not change or become loose.
if he is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and gives him food that we have put before him, in such a way that the food is to the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, if it be large.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in forty days from now; and then one must untie and administer bath and ointment medicines to direct the joint.
And if the constriction is ugly and congested, it should be loosened in one day or two months.
Of the breakage of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus", of which one is small, and it is that which follows the armpit;
and the other is great, and it is that which is below, towards the little finger;
by chance, one breaks only the great humerus, or only the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing.
and when the great ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
If it's only the small bones that are broken, then one should slightly extend and align them.
And if it's a great bone, then you must extract it more strongly;
and stretch it above the couch, and hold the patient's hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others' bones, and let the patient cross himself on his own, and the couch in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any torment.
then stretch one minister's arm to the part below his hand or to the tie, and another minister above.
And then set the mirror equal, according to its best form.
And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is none that are loose and can be grasped by the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint of wood and bone, as we have said before.
And if there is a wound with breaking, I have spoken about it in a singular chapter; If you take care.
And if in the beginning of the restoration something like abscesses arise, then apply a poultice made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft. and bind the poultice on top gently, until the abscesses are pacified.
And then remove the poultice, and put on a plaster made from mill powder mixed with a lot of egg yolk, then place the plasters, and let the middle one be slightly thicker and a little wider than the others.
and know that he should have six plasters or arms in various positions: whether the plaster is on one bone or two.
and hold the plaster above the joint more than elsewhere, and always less far away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the dressing be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh;
and let the cloths that are on the dressing be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh; and let the thread, of which it is strained, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the ligament after some days. And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you anoint the member with hot water, until those itchings are appeased.
and let the member not tightly rest.
And then reapply the stretching, and if the ligament is softened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
And if you take care that numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and let it rest thus for some days, until numbness comes to it and then bind.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen until 20 days.
or around it, then lift his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back.
and know that this dressing is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the combinations and temperaments of virtues.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers it often happens to break, and there is no more than it bends many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, so it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit upright before him evenly.
Then place his hand on the stretched cloth and stretch out the broken bones, and put them in equal alignment with the mirrors, as long as they are well joined.
and apply the poultice and compresses, if no abscess arises, then put a steel splint according to the size of the limb. and be wrapped in one fold of linen.
And if the breakage is around the outer part of the plantar region, then make a ball of cloths and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken foot. and then stretch it with a long cloth, and make the steel splint as wide as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, if that is necessary.
And if the break is at the tip, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another underneath in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it entirely around the hand, and stop the swelling between the fingers.
And if the breaking comes to any of us on the back, then it's the pouches, so make it even, as is fitting; and hold it with a plant, and if you see that it puts a straight small stick to lift the breaking, and does not move;
and if the breaking is on the other back, just like in the index or one of the others, so make it even, and bind it with the healthy joint that follows; or you tie them all together in one holding, as is worth, or place a stick on top, just like a pouche;
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and help those who come there, just as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and one can well see when it turns in front and behind;
and the restoration is such that one binds it above the girdle, and the other below. And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant stretches out their bandage to their equal share.
and it is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the crotch, so that one of the strings points towards the fingernail, and the other strings below the break.
And if it is near the knee, and then the bandage should be below the knee, and the extension should be down.
Then place the mirrors on the bone equally in both hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not come there.
And if there is an abscess hot, then let it cool down and then return to your work and care; The bandage is done in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap above the girdle with doubled bandages two or three times, and remove any superfluities, then turn the leg until the toes come to the root of the knee, and tie a long thread between the crotch and the leg, below the knee from underneath, and let the end of the thread come up.
Then turn to the leg and the armpit the bandage, then put on the girdle stones, and put one stone on the bone of the leg.
Then bind the cloth tightly between the leg and the armpit with soft cloths to put even the constriction, then begin to tie firmly three turns or four on the girdle. and as you go up above the girdle, and loosen the restraint less.
then take the two ends of the thread that you have bound between the leg and the armpit, and tie three stones above, then return to the lower part at the head of the thread, until you come down to the foot.
and the restraint, so that it does not move out of its place, then leave it thus, then if there is no abscess or swelling or any similar thing. And if it happens, then release it, and address what is coming, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then it needs to be gathered up if one can. and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the joint, and pull it forth. and heal it as we have said, until it is sound.
And sometimes the arm is broken so that you put splints in, as in an aid and on an arm.
nevertheless, the restoration done in this way does not harm the patient.
And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the various conditions of temperaments.
Knows that in the hollow of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, then it is only a fissure, or a perforation, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and this is well known.
And the restoration is such that you place equal what is torn in its joints, so that it can be assembled and set as one can.
Then put the plaster, and place a round splint if you need it, and bind it as is necessary, then reward all the preparations that we have said in other breakages, such as abscesses hot and similar. if he puts on each accident what is necessary for him, until he is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, whereof one is called by right "tibiae", and the other is called "fibula".
and it happens in the same way with a break as when it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is done equally as with the arm, and the work is complete. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns wrong from all sides.
And if the thin bone is broken, then bend forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen well; and turns below.
Then administer an extension, and set it equal, and bind the splints equally;
but always, it is necessary that if the break is foul and there are many pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; and lift according to your strength.
And when you have completed all your work, take two wooden splints that encircle the leg from one side and the other, and be of the length of the leg from the groin to the ankle.
then envelop the two splints in one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
and someone administers the bandages along the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and one puts the leg to prevent movement, and properly makes it in the break or where there is a wound.
and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident. if he cures until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
Of the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and one must take care, and there is only a slight wound in more than one disposition.
And if there is a break in the shinbone and you see those bones crowding one another, then put the patient's foot on the ground just as if they were about to go, and then place your own foot where the bones are lifted, and press it so that they return to their places.
Then apply the plaster and poultices on top, and place a small table under the foot of the shinbone, two feet apart, then strain the foot gently, and when you have wrapped cloth around it, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days are passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any breaks in the toes, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; Then place an elastic bandage around the broken toe according to its length, and make it a little wider, then place that table under the foot that I mentioned, and strain it gently.
and if there are two or three or more, break them; and put a small stake on each one according to its size, wrapped in a cloth of linen, and hold the table under the foot. and let it be placed on the top of the table so that the belly of the foot will hold it well.
And it is necessary that you forget not the other things I have said about other breakings, since we have spoken; and treat each accident as it is fitting.
of the breaking of the bone of the finger
When the bone of natural womanhood is broken, make her sit with legs spread wide, then incline her to the part of the back, and hold her by the rear.
then fill the natural opening of the patient's body with cotton, and put in as much as the stomach;
then raise the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jump out the cotton, until it comes to the natural opening, and return the bone with the stomach.
and when it wants to urinate, so remove the cotton, and when it has urinated, put it back in, and do this seven days or around: so the break will be restored, and if you see, take a goat bladder, and tie a cord to its mouth, and fill it with all its natural contents; then blow into the cord strongly, until the bladder is emptied inside: the natural contents will return to the break;
then fill it with cotton, and let it be like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of man or woman is broken, so restore it thus as we have said for the hind leg;
and these breaks are not hidden from those who put their study and use into it and intend to follow my book.
For the breakage signifies more than one disposition to the right path of restoration: Then understand it.
In the splint, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the splint; then wrap cloth around it, and let it be for three days or as long as needed, and it will soon heal.
of breaking with a wound
It is necessary for one who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great or small, like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they should be healed now, so that the healings which we have said bear witness.
And if the wound heals, but the breakage remains, and you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the breakage in the same hour or day, unless abscesses do not come forth.
And if abscesses come forth, then leave the restoration alone until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
And if the extension is not properly fitted for putting it equal to your hands, then readjust with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight divisions of length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, according to what he may need in each treatment of breakage;
and be rough and not too big, so that it does not bend under the pressure on the member at your work, and be pointed forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved bone be placed on top of the visible bone. and bind once, so long as it remains, and let them be even one against the other. And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you should shape the top of the bone until the instruments have possession.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then use a suitable instrument for this purpose, such as a saw or chisel, to your ability.
then remove what is remaining in the bone from sharpness and small scraps.
And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
So that it be back in its place, then soak the cloth in black stiptic wine and properly dress it is. and do not put on the wound any cerote or other thing that contains oil, lest you bring forth rot and corruption.
then administer the plaster when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and shape the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture.
and many times has this been done by a foolish doctor, and he has caused the patient to be brought before him who is dead or corrupted at some time; and let the ligaments be more soft and more gentle than other breaks.
And if the wound is foul or great, and you doubt that evil consequences will come from it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to apply poultices. but wrap around it, instead of poultices, hard cloths and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days the bowing of the wound, then take away what you have put on all wine, and put salve for healing wounds, as salve tetrachloromethane and similar.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member two times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is set and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bow can run down easily.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but goes back down, know that there are small bones, for which it is necessary that you search the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose fragments that cause such pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter here before.
And when the bone is broken and open on the member, as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the great members, do not pull it, for many times death comes from this, but let it be until it can heal.
by chance it will fall out after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, then let it be.
We often see after the breaking of a bone, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the limb. and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Take care then if it is fresh to us: if it is fresh to us, then administer stypic medicines, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, acaica, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with stypic wine or with abundance of egg white or with oil. and put it on the night in stews, and strain it well, and do not remove it for many days;
and put it on the night in stews, and strain it well, and do not remove it for many days; and then loosen it, and begin another, until the swellings are removed;
you strain upon a well-made wooden plank; for the properties of the plank are such that it absorbs all swelling above the limbs;
and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then scrape off the excess on top, and make the surplus appear; or you receive her at any scraper, until she is removed, and care for her as long as she is healed.
of the member which is weak after healing
When the breakage of bone is restored, and remains after the weak and subtle limbs, since this happens for many reasons: because one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and could not allow the nourishment to come to the member; due to a multitude of thorns; or due to excessive great movements, not in its own hour; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the treatment is that you should feed the patient and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him. and administer bathwater, and give him joy and consolation;
then put powder on the member, so that the powder attracts to great swelling, and the thorns often dry out with water, until the swelling reaches the member. and returns to its natural shape.
of the twisted member after healing When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken apart, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function:
Don't believe foolish people who say one should break the member anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land.
and this work is blamed, and great evils come of it, and by chance death ensues;
nevertheless, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as chamomile leaves, roots, and melilotus, and similar things;
and apply a softening plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and take the sap of chamomile, and cook it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top;
or take ripe figs, and grind them with flax seed, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the knot is removed by continuous and long rubbing with moist hands. And there should be gentle movement to the member every hour.
And if the twistiness is worn in and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then you must cut it just up to the bone, lightly with a fine incision. and put care and study into the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary now to bring it back into place carefully.
For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and by chance, if one resets it with points at the joint.
therefore it does not behoove to move him when he is swollen. many times brings on spasms and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, one should make the patient better, then leave him alone until the abscess is appeased.
then immerse the member in hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
The jaws are often dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are slightly pulled out of their places, and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by gentle means.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you should reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and pushes the mirror's pouch with one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other two hands should be elsewhere, to make it even.
and instruct the patient to soften his jawbones, and move them from all sides. And the attendants put it in its place, until it returns to its natural position.
And if it is stiff, indeed even if both jawbones are together, then loosen them with hot water and oil, until they become slightly supple.
do not pull too hard when repositioning, as we have said.
And when they are repositioned evenly, and the patient's mouth feels well softened, then put wet cloths on them in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, and bind it lightly with moist bandages.
and the patient sleeps on his back, with his legs between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or left, nor does he strain himself to swallow, but takes light food until the pains are gone and the jawbones are numb.
and then ease up on it so it hurts slightly, and don't trouble yourself to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well set and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and accustomed sweats come, and perhaps dissolution of the bowels, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a warning; and many times the person who has it dies within 9 days.
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of it and the breastbone, and is sometimes dislocated to the rear, and one can well perceive this.
And the restoration is when the patient lies down on his back and stretches out his arms; and then press it firmly onto your palm, and it will return;
then put on the poultice and bandage, and tighten it;
and the shoulder bone which is towards the back cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it does dislocate at any time, then set it back in its place, as we have said;
Then place the poultice and bandage, and hold it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
And similarly bring back the shoulder blade, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
one of which is when it dislocates at the lower part of the socket. and the second is at the rib part; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves;
and often dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for it springs forth hastily;
in those with enough flesh, it jumps forth slowly and returns slowly.
And perhaps happens to some men a blow or breaking, and the shoulder becomes swollen with an abscess hot, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you experience it, until you are certain. and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it falls towards the socket, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them. and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below the socket to touch the top of the shoulder, just as if it were an ox. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their neighbor or move with any movements.
and also if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch.
and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to restore when it is new or if the child is sick.
And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then sets the splints below the armpit, and lifts the joint to its place by force up high. and the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it up high, then sets it down; so it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in three days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister applies warmth to soothe and calm, like a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and applies it;
then the patient is placed on their back, and a woolen cloth of equal thickness, not too soft nor too hard, is put under the armpit; then the nurse places their heel on top of the cloth, and lifts the shoulder blade virtuously, and pulls the patient's hand.
and other attendants hold the patient's head, so he does not move downwards; the shoulder returns to its place immediately, and if you see that it resets in this way:
and it is that you make someone older than the patient be present; and it should be standing next to the patient's side, and push the patient's shoulder under the assel of the patient, and lift the assel up high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another attendant pulls the patient's hand down towards their stomach. And if the patient is too light, so let him carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And reset it in another way:
and it is that one puts a long iron rod in the earth, so that the head of the shoulder becomes as hot as a piston, and not too big nor too small; then it is put under the patient, but so that there are folds of cloth on top, and the patient is standing away from the long wooden beam;
Then let her stretch out her hand downward to the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a brand of two arms wide and four fingers broad, which has the tip rounded so that it can easily enter into the depth below the shoulder, according to this shape:
then place it on top of the tip of the fist so that the fist does not harm the patient, then put it under the shoulder blade of the patient;
and stretch your arm over the fist of length, and place the aid on top of the fist, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm over one shoulder strap of wide width, and let the hands hang down below, and leave the body hanging from the other side: The joint now becomes one.
And when it is so, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the armpit a woolen sphere, then put the poultice wrapped with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all of the shoulder and around, then restrain it under the armpit gently, and turn the bandage over the poultice, and encircle the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he moves little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then move him more after 3 days or 7, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is sound.
And if the joint is moved out of its place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, then you must administer fire cauterizations in three places, as is written before this chapter on fire cauterizations.
And if you do all this and after 7 days the dislocation occurs again, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is near the breast or shoulders or behind is made by a blow and stretching of hands, and another kind of injury;
and heal until they are sound.
And if after healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take baths many times until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the hip
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated to points, and it returns to those points;
and it has become dislocated all around, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not restored, for one can see it well and feel it well; and becomes dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the wounded limb with sound, then it can be seen openly. For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess were to form there, it would be hard to reset;
and by chance cannot be fully restored from top to bottom, even when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes to it.
And the restoration is this, when it is such that one can restore it, that you stretch out his hand with yours. et its arms be spread out, and the hands be soft as wax according to the finger joints around, above, and below, and bind the jointure to its armpits together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and brings back the hip that is displaced.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong stretching;
and it is that two ministers stretch the arm, and hold it thus two ministers, so that it does not move in the stretching;
then turn the arm from each side, then having enveloped a cloth two times long and wide;
and when the fingers join the joint to its hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and bind the joint firmly until it returns;
and when it is in place, then put on dry plaster with some egg, and bind firmly, and put the arm under the patient's collarbone, and let it stay for a few days, then release.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the ligament and let it go.
And if you see that the joint is not firmly situated, then redo the application and loosen the ligament, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set. Then loosen it.
And if he feels grief after the adjustment of the joint, and it is stiff, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until it is eased. Or you put a thick sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into the bath. And when he sweats, then rub the joint temperately, then put the fat on again, and then enter into the bath. and do it thus two or three times, until he is cured.
and if you see, then put on a warm poultice made of moist hay and butter, and strain it upwards;
if it will return to its place.
the dislocation of the hand
The joints of the hand dislocate, and the swelling is slight, more so than with other joints. However, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same way that it has dislocated, so that the swelling may be reduced or an abscess may not form.
And the reduction is that you place the ailing hand on a board, and stretch out the fingers of the good hand, and the other hand place it equal, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and press until it recovers.
However, it is necessary for you to check if it is well in place; Then put the patient's arm outstretched on a board for extension and return. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient places their back hand on the table, and the doctor puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
If she returns now, it's well. But if not, then strain plastering soothing abscesses on him and leave him thus without allowing to rebegin.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted.
and nothing can harm the patient except until his hand is softened, and he cannot strain to do anything at all. then know that the nerves are severed or the arteries;
so there is no other remedy except to strain by burning in the case, and it so happens that there is nothing else.
And when the hands are in place, then put on the plaster as we have said, and strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, then soak it in hot water and rub it gently until he is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the veins on the hand are opened at each end, sometimes on the back of the palm or belly;
Then press the joint, and force the dislocation into your fists as it recovers, then support the head of the joint, and guide it towards the part where it is separated;
and leave it for two days, and then set it straight on that day;
and bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and disconnect it the next day, and make it move, and bind it to the nut;
and do this often until it is straightened, and also do so if it has been dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same thing when it is dislocated from the other side.
Loosening of the spine's curvature
When the curvature of the back or neck is loosened, or there are multiple loosenings, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the sign is that urinations jump forth without willpower, nor can it be held, and many times some member, either one or both thighs or two arms, becomes soft.
And many times the shinbone bends at four parts;
That which bends at the back is called "giloctitis";
the cure is that you reward it if the giloctitis comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or beatings or similar things, the ancient ways of curing say with great words, where there is no great benefit at all;
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the giloctitis that comes on the front of the stomach, there is no reason nor health;
and similarly that which comes directly in two sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient lies stretched out on their face in one position, and has a restraint below them, so they do not hurt themselves;
then make a hole in the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a strap under the patient's armpits, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two attendants know the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two fires;
and be well closed, the fire as we have said, and the mirror put its palms on the spine firmly, until it regains;
And if it does not regain by this treatment, take a board three arm-lengths long, and place it under the appearance, and the patient is in position, and push the head of the board under the appearance, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the mirrors on their feet above the other head of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place;
and if you see, make it turn back into its original position. And it is that you place two irons on the patient's head, one from a long arm and the other from a similar length, with a space of an espace (or hand's breadth) between each iron.
and have in each iron one perforation, where the key (or pivot) runs, and let the irons be firmly fixed in the earth, so that they do not move.
and between each of the two irons there is one turning iron, on which the key turns, and have in the two turnings two small irons a hand's breadth long, to turn the key.
and then tie the string that is between the axes to the key towards the head, and the other string to the other key towards the feet, and each of the servants turns his own key along the entire string, and the master makes the point equal as we have said.
When it is equalized, then put on a drying poultice with plenty of egg white, and then bind it, and then make an incision in a tablet of three inches long, which will restore the place of the hip joint and the part of the vertebrae to health; then tie it up with a string, as we have said, and use gentle rubbing on the patient, until he is well.
And if nothing comes at the end of health, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the incision that we have said before. And sometimes when administering one takes a piece of lead, and sometimes there appears in the lower back of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, therefore one should not have presumptions about it. By chance death would come.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come apart in dislocations, nor does this happen to the other joints.
and the joint of the hip is dislocated into four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and more inside than outside, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and appears more swollen on the diseased side than on the healthy side, and the diseased person cannot flex their knee to fire. and it is the lump that is beneath the swelling of an abscess hot, because the head of the hip comes loose.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in the back is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of that person to whom it has happened in front, are that his leg is well set according to completion. Anyway, don't double the knee with pain, and if you want to make it walk, it can't beforehand, and retains its urine, and swells the vein, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the knee is at the level below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you restore the dislocation to its original state and it remains according to its condition, there being no need for care. and it is not necessary that he have presumption.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of four kinds of dislocation, hurry to reduce the joint, make it stand firm inside and outside, and set it straight to the right and left. by chance if it returns, and there is no need for further care.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must make the assistant strong and hold the leg strongly with both hands or with a strap that is tied above the knee. and another assistant extends his hand above in this manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft strap above the buttocks. and another holds the end of the strap;
and they all stretch up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common to all three forms, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then it is necessary to make an attempt on his shape.
When the dislocation is at the parting, then you must place the patient on their left side, then put the strap above the root of the buttocks, and the end which is below the angle, then stretch the strap upwards towards the angle, and towards the hip.
Then take another attendant's arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick person's hip bone, and stretch it forth strongly: now it will return to its place;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two legs of the patient together with a strong soft strap on the two heels, and on the two knees, and the sick leg should be stretched out two doits more than the others;
then it should be hung from the top of a beam, and be above ground two long arms;
then command the attendant to embrace the head of the hip bone, and let another attendant hold on with the sick person, who should embrace strongly the hip bone, because the joint is returning quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at the back, so lies the patient, as we have said in the one who has gilboesity, and stretches it out on the ill-affected leg properly, and also on the foot.
then put two pokers, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert the poker between the patient's thighs in shape. and have damp cloths placed around, so that the patient does not bleed, then stretch each minister towards him, and put the mirror on his hand equal to the dislocation.
If she returns, it is good.
If not, put on the .ie. table, and press it thus as we have said in gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the ill-affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and put the mirror's pressure on top of the patient's knee, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not behoove to stretch out the patient downward or lift him up toward the earth, but rather it should be as though the hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on both hips. and be above his face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and one should not press on the joint at the table; and it will be so when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be equal. then adjust the hips, apply a poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. and if he rests for three days or four, then loosen it, and apply a poultice to it;
and if you see that they are equal, then strain, as before, and let it be for three days;
then loosen it, and let it move gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
and does not become dislocated forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its normal position, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take the patient's knee with your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly. and another attendant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends well back into its natural position.
and put the poultice on, and make the leg straight to the hip, and hold it together tightly for three days or four, then loosen it;
and do not bother the patient with going, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the member is not in place, so administer extension strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes strained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the knee is swollen, and tend towards the part where it is dislocated:
the recoverings are lighter, and one must stretch them lightly with their hands when he is only slightly stretched.
And when it is fully dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him by the leg, above the knee;
then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it up high, and push the foot up high well;
and make it twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
if she returns, it is good;
if not, then resume the work, for it comes again;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a staff firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around, so that he does not harm the patient;
then hold the minister's thigh, and another minister stretch out the foot to their hands or to the strap, which they tie around the ankle of the foot; then stretch out each minister equally, and the straps should be in place between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when one is stretching;
then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation in their hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is placed, so put the plaster and bandages on top, and strain firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, lest the ligament be too tight.
then leave it two or three days, and if the ligament relaxes, strain again.
then loosen it on the third day or quarter, and forbid the patient to walk for four days. and if he walks before that term is reached, it is not certain that he will not relapse again.
And if an abscess appears there, then it is necessary to pacify it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
you must When the two bones are dislocated, then they should be gently stretched without labor, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a smooth surface or on .i. table entirely straight, and put your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it recovers.
and when it is equal and nothing appears, then place a two-legged stool under the sole of the foot, then strain tightly, and let it be for three days, then release. and make it rest, until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and one seeks to restore it, often times happen that the patient dies:
if you are not modest in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, nor hasty;
and begin with soothing and gentle things, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the abscess may come to life;
and when the limb is at rest, administer soothing remedies to abscesses, hot and dry, and treat the wound as it should be, with powdered ointments.
and if there is a breakage and separation of small bones, take them away and do as we have said in simple diseases.
and beware of entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this is worth movements according to thy Creator, and for the wisdom of thy arms and thy body.
