Here is the translation: And it has come to me in vision that I will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is unknown throughout all, so the science is perished and decayed, and nothing remains except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and the science is estranged.
It seems to me that I shall bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. and I shall bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for them, as is necessary.
And because for this reason no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes this to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the proportions of members, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and their movement and rest, and the location of their origin.
And therefore Hippocrates says that a name without a name is much, but with work it is little. and similarly in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, he must beware lest he err and kill people.
as I have often seen many of those who involve themselves in this science, and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut away the abscess of scrofula from a woman's neck and also severed the arteries of the neck. Why so much blood issued out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And there was another surgeon who treated a stone from an old man's body, and the stone was large; and he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
And there was another surgeon who treated a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking he got a wound;
and the surgeon, full of ignorance, tied the break above the wound with rough string, and left no dressing on the wound, and let it end thus.
and he commanded that it not be untied at all;
and it remained thus until the leg became completely inflamed and the toes came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I dislocate it so it becomes quiet and feels no pain.
But all the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who opened up an abscess that had become inflamed and then spread through the evil of his authority.
For a chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless one can remove all that which is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, work in which there is danger in many conditions;
and I will show you each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself so that the foolish speaker cannot speak evil of you.
Take your arms in custody, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way that through God's grace you may come to salvation and be praised.
and let dreadful diseases of grievous sickness;
and put aside your arms that cause you to doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: Take no heed of a bad disease unless you are summoned to be a foolish doctor.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical emetics, and the chapters are arranged from head to feet.
and the forms of instruments, and the fixings of cautery, and everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and poultices and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
and the chapters are arranged and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and is ordained for the chief joints up to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Therefore that we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid, and of harm, is the longest and most subtle speech, and the secret answers.
and about these things many wise men spoke, and agreed with them;
and I will add no more words to theirs, for I fear the length.
I say that fire cauterization helps universally all humors or bodies, except two humors: that is to say, hot humor without matter, and dry humor without matter.
In hot and dry humors with matter, they all agreed and said that cauterization is great help; and the others say the opposite: that a cauterization is not good for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness;
and that one who says the opposite says that cauterization makes great help for hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it to be true on many occasions through experience.
And in any case, do not meddle with fires except by him who has tried it and knows through long use the book of cauterizations, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the surprises and the pace of time.
of other complexions we have no fear, especially in cold and wet diseases. And all the doctors assembled and agreed on cauterization.
And know, son, that cauterization with fire is part of the secrets of cures, and of greater virtue than cauterization by burning medicines.
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that is burned, and does not harm another member unless it is named.
The burning medicines come from member to member by approaching, and bring to the member grievous disease of great corruption; and by chance the patient dies.
The fire due to its highness and the goodness of its substance does not burn if there is no excessiveness.
And I have found this by experiment and the length of my service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things.
and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is replied with fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases from bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating. or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm that happens is put away by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if the cauterization is for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the member.
And never think about this, dear son, as foolish people do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so;
and they say so; but it's not as they think, because cauterization is not a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and its value lies more in its promptness than in its medicine, due to its virtue and the power of its operation.
And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the disease, and its virtue;
and the excesses are gathered in him by the consumption of meats and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered at a place where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterization for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; But it happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the latest in medicine, and that is true;
but they do not believe that cauteries are worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is said that cauteries are the latest in medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they did not say this except for the quality of the gold and the height of its substance;
and they said that the heat of a cautery does not cause corruption, but this is not true for I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men;
and gold cauteries are worth more than iron ones, as they also said. And even when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it becomes cooled down soon.
and if you heat it too much; so they become red-hot; and thus it has enough hindrance.
And I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the view may be more light for you to find.
This cauterization is worth against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done due to the cause of a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of excessive dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicinal solution, moderating the head's third humor or fourth, according to what the virtues, age, and habituation of the patient can bear. and then make the patient's head return.
And then make him sit cross-legged in your hands, and put his hands on his lap;
after place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let it come to your middle finger, so that it bleeds forth then reheat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form: And place it on the level marked with ink, and move your hand slowly and carefully, little by little, twisting. then lift your hand slightly, and return to the level if you see the bone just a little bit; and if you do not see it, then start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
after that take a piece of silk, and put in an absorbent and soft cotton inside, and place it on the level, and let it be for three days;
then apply moistened cloth wrapped in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; then treat the wound of the tetra-pharmaceutical, as long as it remains healthy.
And they say that when an open wound stays longer, the more it purges; and so if aided.
And some of them said that one should cauterize as much so that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
And others say that one should cauterize it as slowly above, and press as hard so that the bone is made as wide as a green thread that women put in their purses so that the humors may be moved out.
and one should leave the wound open for a long time. after that, one should clean and dress it.
And these two manners of cauterizing do not seem to be good in all respects, except in certain men where there is a way of fear.
and it seems to me that I should leave it.
for the head is weakened by the continuous flow of natural fluids, as we witness in other members;
and also when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing is more safe and gentle for me, and I work with that in such a way that salvation ensues.
When in all the head comes chronic pain and endures long, then the patient should use yellow and pills that are called "cochie", and for purging of the head, oils, and plasters. and if one does the fire cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is ineffective. Take care if the head of the patient is hot in nature, and it is not too cold; then cauterize below that one that we have said above. After, make a fire cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we have said before, and make one at the place that is called "vasselz". and it is the place where one puts poultices; and hold your hand so that you do not see all the way to the bone: The patient feels too much greater pain in this fire cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere.
and it is necessary that the corner cauteries be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the head cautery When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease spreads as far as the eye, and the head is purged by medicinal remedies, and all other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are tried, and none of it helps. then he does the cautery by two manners, namely from medicinal agents and fire.
The cautery of medicinal agents is that you take a piece of aloes, remove the rind and pound it into two pieces for the shoulders, and then make an incision in the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can place the piece of aloes under the skin.
and when it is set back, if he binds it well and tightens it so and leaves it thus for twelve hours; and then loosen it and treat with butter of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put on a poultice of butter as long as impetigo appears.
After the treatment with oil until he is healed;
and if you see that these remedies which I have written or discussed concerning concomitant treatments are of no use.
The iron cautery is done according to this method. Heat the cautery until it takes its shape.
And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clove or if it has one little hollow, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
and he puts it on the painful spot, and holds his hand and turns the fire a little bit, until half of the fat that needs to be burned is burnt.
and lift your hand so the artery does not burn, which is outside, and abundance of blood flows.
Then put cotton on the wound, and place it on the site for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with oil until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cauterizer called "cultellare", at every point, and take care not to touch the artery in this migraine that is not old.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizers previously mentioned from medicine and fire do not work, then it is necessary to heat the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it is white;
and mark a line on the weeping place of about half a digit in length, and take your hand away once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and do not bring it just to the bone;
and beware of the jaw that will fall when eating, and the nerves have regard only to the falling and spasms do not come upon the patient, and beware of the disarrangement of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and also for him who does not understand, and is not skilled in this and experienced; and let the work remain in my way;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it on the head just as we have said, and heal the wound until it is sound.
and if you see, administer the fire cauterization that we have said in the chapter on artery extraction, with the cauterizer that has two knives; and this fire cauterization is better than that one and more helpful.
of ear pain from coldness
When ear pain comes from coldness and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", according to the form:
After piercing all around the sick ear, or around both sides where the pain holds in both, and remove one pace above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to burn. and make 10 points around each ear;
after curing the wound until it is healed.
of mouth torture
The torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease;
and do not make any cauterization on likenesses that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you treat this likeness of torture which moves from bloodletting and purging the head and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three fire cauterizations. One in the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips.
And put the cauter in the part that appears sound, and make it cauterize near the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb. and leave the cauter so that the middle part of the ear is burned.
and this is the form of the cauter:
And it is like the appearance of a scalpel that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives are a little thicker.
After the treatment, as I have said before, until he is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make 4 cauterizations. Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
and be treated as we have said before.
From lethargy
To this disease, give the patient great years and pills made from mandrake to the brain;
After having raised the patient's head completely, and place the mustard plaster written in the treatise on emplasters on the occiput.
and this is the manner of cauterization: If he does so as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not healed, then make three fire cauterizations inside the head from top to bottom until the neck, and leave a space of two fingers between each one.
and treat it as the others, and if you see swelling coming on, and the patient is suffering, then make one fire cauterization in the middle. and if necessary, two others above the two horns, and treat it until he is healed.
and let the cauterization be that which is called "olivary", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and all that we have previously said;
after which remove the head of the patient, then make a cauterization inside the head and on each horn, and one last and three on the spine of the neck.
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four fire cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it so that the most excessive burning has passed, and lift your hand; after the treatment until he is healed, and the cauterization which is called "olivary" that we have mentioned before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cauterization unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to purge the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear to suffer, make gargling and gentle mastication frequent the brain often with good meat;
after the king's head is put in a medium, and one cauterization according to what we have said before, and one cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of body, on the spine of the back and of the neck, and be the olivary cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cauterization in this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thick phlegm is formed, then make those cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will purge the brain, according to what is said before in the division.
After instructing the sick person; After making a bandage of well-made linen, just like a circle, and putting it on the head;
and the patient should be crossed, and kept well from all parts;
After applying the poultice, and smear with old goat butter; and let it be heated over tempered fire, so that the patient can bear it being applied to the wound. After removing the circle from inside the head and letting it cool down;
and do this to the patient once a week with good management, until he is healed.
Or if you see that it is being cauterized by making several points all over the cautery.
This way of cauterizing moistens the brain adequately;
and then put on a damp cloth soaked in butter and goose fat.
of the eyes' evil When evil comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that purifies the head, and watch out for all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
After instructing him to sit behind his head, and having him cauterized on the head, and having two cauterizations on the two temples if the descending of the evil is together in both eyes, or in one if it is in one;
and stop all cauterization of all veins and arteries that are beneath the hair, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of shedding blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop it to the extent that you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the cautionary incision how to stop it;
and never do a cauterization or hatterail below the two bones behind.
and one sees that it is cold, clammy superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of this cure, descending to the eyes: I cautery on the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations beneath the lower jawbone. and if there is need for more, then he should cauterize the bleeding above the skull at each little cauterization.
When you apply medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three draughts of mulberry juice. after the king's head, and make a cauterization in the oil pit of the cauterizer. and make two cauterizations on the "clavilis" above the temples, one a little below the hair.
and take care not to cut the artery.
And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this caustic called "olivare". Until it takes its shape.
And if you see that you should make two cauterizations on the two temples as long as the temples are.
and don't let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
of the hair that points the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyelids is converted into a partition, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations in two ways. it means by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your sight; after which mark on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be below the hairs;
Then I place moistened cotton in egg white and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the fire cautery to its usual form:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked out little by little many times, so that the colors be burned away from there.
and the signs of the health of the operation are that you see the parchment retracted and the hairs raised to the point of the eye.
Then lift your hand, and let it be like this for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the scab is removed. after the treatment of ointment as long as they are healed.
And if after this the hairs come and the parchment is softened then recommence the cautery on that same place, just as you did at first.
And if the hairs are gone, so cauterize it as long as the paper is lifted to its natural place and is even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
The burning cauterization of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle's leaf.
Then take French soap and live coal, each one a., and grind them together well. and make it quickly, so that it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and put it on top of the paper. and if the illness is held only in one eye, then you should operate on one, and also on both. and put moistened cotton under the eye.
et the patient's chest be in your hand and place your thumb showing above the medicine, and press it and move it all the times that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he feels biting as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your hand. And when the biting is past, then lift up the cloth, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision. and if it is thus, then it is well.
If not so, then put more medicine on the cloth or let the medicine have its effect, until your works are equal and your eyes are in order.
Then put a moistened cotton poultice on it until the redness is gone, after treating the cloth of ointment which is called "diaphenys" and others, until he is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work so that it does not fail in the eyes of others.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then the medicine recommences on that same place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after the cure until they are healed;
and that is the shape of the fir cone of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to how they are constricted;
and let not the right way be revealed to him who is ignorant of this art.
(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.)
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterized according to this manner.
Command the patient to place his head on your shoulder; and hold the ministers' head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or leave its place;
then put wet cotton in egg white or in purslane juice on the eye;
after burning the cautery which is thus:
and it is shaped like a comb at the top as if it were the cautery itself;
if you look, then it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you look, then it is also like a tent;
but all the same, this which is shaped is useless for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and removing the purulence, and drying; and if it is closed, then you must work on it, and remove the pus from inside.
after put above the hot cautery and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the nose up to the eye so that your hands do not go crazy. and put the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then repeat the fire treatment once more, and if necessary again, and let it be for three days.
After that, apply a moist cotton poultice in butter, and the treatment of drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days have passed and it is not healed, then apply medicine with a corrosive quality until the bone is uncovered. and read according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of doing a cautery on a fistula that none of the ancients said. You open a fistula and leave it open; After that, put in the opening one subtle camomile of which there is the form: and fill it to the quantity of an egg-sized piece of pommade; and hold your hand with camomile firmly, and do not let the patient move until the pommade has melted into its own oil;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a damp cotton cloth over an egg white or in water:
the poultice if it does not take the place of a fistula, and the wound by marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to make a perforation in the navel, and bring the fistula back to its natural place within the navel according to what is fitting for its own location.
(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.) Many times there occur cracks in lips called "fissures", and similarly in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then warm a small surgical cauterizer according to this form:
And put it hastily into those fissures until it becomes just so;
after the treatment, the place of cerote as long as it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made a purulence and run and is enveloped and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in sections, and it does not benefit. then it is necessary that you make the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; After the boil or abscess of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron becomes cool in its presence, and then leave.
and do it thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in remedies, until he is healed.
and if he is healed thus, that's good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure him with medicines and it does not work, then place the patient's head in your hand. after apply the fire cauterization where the form will come out here after, in this manner as you put a chain on the tooth.
and place the hot hasten inside the cauterization, and hold it so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
after lifting your hand and restarting the cautery according to your will;
after filling the patient's mouth with salty water, and having him hold it for an hour and a rich sweat.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are fixed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When the toothache comes from coldness, whether it is hot or cold, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two ways: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and shape the end into a iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and melt in butter, and place on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools.
and thus do it often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and place on the aching tooth, and then put hot iron until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The fire cautery together with fire is such that you take a dog of iron or clay, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient.
After heating the cautery, in order that the form will come out afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down.
Do this often, for the pain will be taken away that very day or the next one.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the pressure of that cautery, and then let it flow.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery wherever you want, and according to what you can.
and this is the form of the iron rod:
of scrofulas When scrofulas are of a slimy and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion through medicines, then burn the cautery so that the form comes out, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from one side of the cautery.
and place the hot cauterize on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, place the cauterize according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and put a moistened cloth in butter so that the sore is removed;
afterwards, apply ointments and unguents until it is healed.
When the moors overcome the channels of the womb, and similarly when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines;
afterwards, make a cauterization at the root of the throat, and take care not to come all the way up to the throat, and let it burn only a little bit.
After which, I do another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" from which we have the form beforehand.
and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and every illness of perturbation are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, then I do two cauterizations on the forehead in the soles. and another cautery inside the breast between the two breasts;
and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the form previously said.
And if you see, do a cauterization that pierces all the cauterization which is called "point" from which the form is before in the illness of the ears;
and let the points be just up to thirty, or around that.
After healing according to what is said above, and having the fire cauterization at three rings according to this form:
And therefore are the cauterers lighter, because you make them in triplicate.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
(unchanged translation from earlier) Then instruct the patient to lie on his back and on his side. after lift the kerf that is inside the tittle of the doves with your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the cautery which has two needle-like things in this form.
and cauterize the kerf as far as it can be pierced to the side, and let the figure of the cautery come together with four cauteries.
and because of this it is made a cautery with the cautery that has three needles, therefore the figure of cauterization has six cauteries.
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three needles.
And once is added to that one nerve for which there are eight cauterizers.
After this put on the fire cautery powdered with ceruse. After this make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little good happens then, so make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized skull, or many cauterizations in pricking.
For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach, and they trouble his complexion, and there are many cathartics for him, and he is accustomed to the usual cures but does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient lies down on his back, stretches out his legs and arms. Then make three cauterizations below the ribcage to the quantity of an egg, with all the cautery sharp, and two cauterizations outside the two sides until the shape of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they will not be joined together when they will give forth pus.
and let the cauterizations be so deep that they penetrate the two parts of the skin, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
And if you see it necessary to cauterize a large one in the stomach according to this form;
and whoever has fear of this cautery, cauterize it in piercing and sign on the stomach at one point according to the quantity you see fit. Then the cauterizer performs the entire fire cautery which is called "points".
After the care of the wound that we had before, until he be healed.
When pain comes to the liver from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is greatly removed from its natural composition by superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in sections, and it does not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be purged on his liver; and mark three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the ribs, where the man's flank comes;
and have a space of about an inch between each cauterization; and let the cauterizations be on the length of the body, and do not press too hard with your whole hand at each cauterization;
and let it burn only half as long as the key, and have the patient stand straight on his feet;
and if he cannot, then he must kneel, stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms.
And if you wish, then burn the cauterizing fires with a knife, being subtle and skilled in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the flesh, for you would dry out the entire body. and let it come just to boiling, for the blood is very subtle thereabout, and you know this well.
When he has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the flesh, then the patient feels no more than moderate pain;
and if it is in the capsule, then he feels excessive pain.
And then when this treatment was for mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back on a pillow;
and then sign over the site where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reed, because this is its form: And cauterize the cautery so long as the coals are burned, and come to just short of bursting, so that the burning is all gone.
after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until he is healed;
and it does not behoove anyone to use this cautery except someone who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these illnesses have been cured on some occasions.
He can work boldly, and it seems to me that it is better to leave them.
of the cauterizing for pleurisy
The old ones said that one should make plural cauterizations of aristolochic roots, and in such a manner: take a root of aristolochic, as long as you can find, and be dry, and also as thick and as long as your thumb; and the moill in oil, and the emprens to fire, and cauterize the cautery between the forcele and low col, and two little cauterizes a bit down in the part that is below the beard;
and two little cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a bit behind; and one cauterizer in the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two on the ribs of the breast after the cauterizer that is between two shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but make it open freely just as in smelling.
And they say that any old person uses the fire cauter to make it look like a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and the heat relieves the pain, just as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear for the patient who dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said about the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cauterization that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three cauterizations, or four, according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver caustic that we have said before.
and do not press your hand all over the cauterization, and let the patient be aware of what's happening on their back.
and another manner of cauterization is that you scrape the caustic which has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and lift the key that is near the mouse, or where the patient's skin comes towards the left side, and be the elevations which you lift with the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
After that, place the two edges inflamed so that the key is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cauterization, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, then cauterize the entire fire cautery to three nurses.
After the cure when he has got a purpuration by long time, and this is like the others of the cures said before.
The cautery is not good for dropsy, unless it is done in the manner called "asclytes".
When you cure according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast. and let the cauterizations be well-nigh the spleen of good cheer.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open to allow purging for a long time, and do not cease the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be together with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the nail that we have shown before; and he who has an olive-shaped back, according to what is mentioned here before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and are full of yellowish pus, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the wrist bone and the ring finger. and lift your hand with the cautery so as not to turn back.
And do not enter too far in, thus the yellow water would burst forth, and the cauterize should be according to this form:
Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the thumb bone; and let the cauters be long, one under the knee in front and the other behind on the leg;
and leave the cauters open for a long time until the pus issues forth;
after the healing of the other wounds that we have mentioned.
When a flux of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vital and digestive forces that are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient well suffering and of great virtue, so make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been said here before or stomach cauterization, to circulate cauterization. and four cauterizations around the mouth subtle for every cauterization is subtle, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abounding and the patient suffering, then make one cauterization on the navel, and one cauterization on each rib, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are ancient and are of thick cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, so make cauterizations. Three on the back of the spine, that one which is entirely below the almond-shaped node and node in a triangular way, and one cauterization under the mouth two days.
and if you think that his stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one makes a large cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for all the subtle cauterizations. and let the cautery remain for a long time. After treatment let it rest until it is healed.
When you cut at the elbow, if the cautery appears to be red and raw, then put it all afire on the elbow that is being coped. and let your hand stay there until the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, so that the blood does not cut.
do this once or twice, and if there is much elbow, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the cures of ointments, using them until they are healed.
and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the head, it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When someone has a fistula, and it is inflamed and discharges foul-smelling pus and corrupted moisture, then you must carefully examine the entire tent (fold) to its deepest part.
After it appears red and raw, put the cautery in the fistula according to the quantity that the tumor has entered, and restart the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of the need.
and beware of burning the nerve which are inflamed, and great veins.
if the fistula goes to the bladder and intestine, then beware of these places, and do not make fires except in a well-enclosed space, and think that it is not a danger;
after the cure has been done as long as it is necessary, and if the wound is scaled over and the matter is removed after a long time, then you should know that the wound is entirely healed;
and if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is putrid, and corrupts the bone to the foundation; and thus as one of those which we will say in its place.
When pain of cold comes to the ribs, and great windiness, and does not take shape like a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on both sides of the ribs at the cauterized clave, as we have said before;
and if we were to cauterize it in the middle, there would be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then one makes a cauterization on the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the scrotum begin, and there are two on the right side and two on the left side, and each should be as long as a nose's length.
and one makes another cauterization behind the back, where you have need of it;
and the cauterizations should be shaped like a key according to the form mentioned above.
When the menses are cold and moist, and do not cease for this reason to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: Then it is necessary to make three fire cauterizations around the mouth, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two fire cauterizations behind the back;
and let the cauterizations be nail-shaped, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the hollow of the hip, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and it is found that the navel is in the departing place of the abdomen, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hollow of the hip with one cauterization resembling a circle, and sign before the navel around the hollow as it turns, so that the hollow be inside the circle;
and let the cauterizations be such as those which we have cauterized on the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, then do three cauteries of the olive-sized ones, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the keys.
and take care until he is healed.
Of the pain in the intestines When pain comes to the groin of the hip, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured from what we have said in the section on boils, and the care does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the thick humors with foul pills or other good-smelling pills similar to these. Afterward do a cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways: namely, hot medicines together, and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is according to many ways, of which one is such:
That you cauterize on the back of the heel three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and great, and have between each cautery a space the width of two fingers, and be the cauteries olive-shaped.
Never has anyone done a cauterization in mid-heal on the top of the heel, because there are four according to this form.
And if you see, then make a cauterization at the circular cauterery that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the heel.
but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the heel, and all the splinters of the nail are burned.
And it is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach as far as the hip or as far as the leg.
And if it comes to the hip and leg, make two cauterizations on the side where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one above the ankle four finger widths to the left.
and let the cauterizing scalpel be, and let the thickness of the iron burn.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two toes or almost to the knee, then he should cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points". and if it is necessary, and it makes him even more.
and if he sees that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterizing scalpel or circular one, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cauterizer so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great discomfort and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and let them be until the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted all the feet. After a purgation of the belly from which he died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And the wise men say in the cauterization of the groin, this is the manner: make it thus and be as thick at the head as a navillon of date, or a little less, and be between the interstices, and be from one interstice to another of the length of an elder's thumb.
and let the ligaments be like two parts, and also as if they were nails, and it has one band of iron well made;
and this is the shape:
and let it be heated until it is entirely red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the boil of the patient's haunch, and let it turn on the healthy side;
and let the cauterizer do one fire once the cauterization is done, and let it leave for three days; and then make an ointment with butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery for the fear of its glance, and if we see not what is being used;
and yet these are good cauterizers, who can bear it, and where it affects.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you make an instrument with interstices where the edges of the door descend, and it be of earth or iron to a length of one span, and in its height have two notches, and between each notch the quantity of the thickness of a hen. and be open on top and bottom, and join together according to this shape:
After put the handle of the haunch on the patient lying on a pig's side, and then place your hand above the handle of the haunch. After pour the hot water between the two circles of the ewe that has been heated by fire in a pot, and let it stay for an hour or ten, and allow the patient to suffer from heat and burning.
For it also finds a cauterization like fire;
and when the ulcers are gone, raise your hand with the instrument and lift up the cloth of sweet oil, and let it be so for three days, and put on butter until what is black from scarring is removed; and leave it for three days that purulence may issue;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as long as they are healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument hold oil according to what you have done in the correct manner;
and this is the manner of hot oil, and I have written it or treated it as a chapter on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and hot water, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter;
where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter; and put one pot on top of another well-weighted, and put on alum, charcoal, and sweet oil on top, until there are two layers above the powders then you will have it well prepared in your hand;
and leave him thus until he descends with an ague and fever or falls into a swoon, then take all that sweat and pour it on stones and on alkaline as before.
And then if it will be much feverish and is administered in motion of works of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
For it makes an aching work like fire, and if there are other medicines which one cauterizes well on the skin thus as thesis, and honey mixed with anacardium and stones with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment by which one man was cured of the pain in his haunch and sciatic vein, and he greatly praised it, saying that no other treatment was done, and that he became well only once when this treatment was made, and he bathed himself just as he teaches below.
And then in this manner you take green and fresh lardaric, and crush it much with a little bit of grease, and put it on the skin and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and bind it;
and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed up, and then make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery on such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dyscrates says that when the varicose vein is cauterized with goat's gall, it helps a lot.
and the cautery should be done in this manner. Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called a fleshy fold.
Then take dried goat's gall, and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and let it stay until it is extinguished.
and do so again, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it will come up to the groin, and that the pain is ceased.
and this manner of cauterization is called "goat's gall cauterization".
from the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from too great evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these likenesses is worth a cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be freed from fetid pills or similar things, and one should apply it to the back, there where the pain stays, three lines marked out, and in each line 5 cauteries or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and let the cauterization be done according to the cauterization which is called "points";
and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the middle of the shoulder according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a thin, pale face when they wake up, and fear; and you find it in the lower back of the spine and on the appearance that comes over other spines.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize at the "celcle" cautery according to this form. So the limb must be equally red throughout the cauterization.
And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a fire cautery two or three lines away from each other, and have the points close to one another.
After the cure, keep the wound so long as it is healing according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in a hollow spot which is near a nerve.
from the pain of joints
When the pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner:
make the majority of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need, then prick on the surface of the foot, so that the fire cautery claims "point". And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a fire cautery on each knee three or four times in each part, for all the olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need more, then do it again, but don't keep your hand away from the fire's heat until the spark has burned out.
And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, administer the fire cautery that we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the knuckle two lines;
and if there remains a point of pain on the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to the shoulders or the back, then cauterize each part and take good care of the patient and administer medicines.
For if you make good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When flux comes to the groin, and the bellies descend to the testicles and it is new, then it is necessary that when you see them cured, do not make him eat at all that day; and he uses things that bring a stinking smell to his belly, so that the devil descends from his belly;
after he has sat on his back between your hands, and tells him to hold his elbow so that the swelling is repaired, and tighten them to your two arms, and draw down below the rash on the bone of the finger, and all in a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body.
then heat the fire cauterize which has this shape:
as long as he is white and gives signs. Then tighten the swellings to their place; and the attendants hold his hand so that he does not return backward;
and work well the groins of the patient, and put underneath him the cushion and the servant on the groins, and another above the breast which holds his hands;
Then place the cautery on the sign with your entire hand, and hold it straight and steady until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue again as many times as necessary to reach the bone. and watch carefully that the blister does not burst when you are doing the cautery; so that you don't burn it; and so the patient does not die or suffer another ill.
And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that children's cauterizations be subtle according to their size, and for great people also great according to their measure;
after three days' cure, apply the grease of butter to the site of the cautery until the scab is removed;
after the cure of other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed.
and it is necessary that his nails are left to grow long, so that the bowels do not protrude when he will want to go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, let him be given a bandage well made, and wear it for 40 more days;
and let him have good rest, that he does not labor too much and beware of too great drinking and eating, and too high bragging;
and when he has followed this instruction, then he is entirely well.
And I will say next about the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make a fire cauterization on the cauterized part according to its size, and let it be burned to the third degree of heat; after the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize at the fire cautery to three angles according to this form:
but mark the first sign at the beginning and make a line on the width above the ulcer, and another below it, and draw your hand through all the cautery with a nail.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and moody.
from old pain in any member When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary that he be cauterized at the cautery which is called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, and virtue, and its location of torments and pain.
if it is sound after the first cautery, it is well;
since then, start another cautery on top of that one; for it is custom that the member that is nearest should change, and therefore you must make the cauterizations until the patient is sound.
The humors are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Can't you see it being cauterized, take heed if the patient is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption may overwhelm the entire patient, then make five cauterizations on top of the head: I pierce to the forehead, and the other at the end of the eyebrows; and two above the two horns, and one behind above the haterel;
and let your hand be so free that the fire comes to just above the bone, and as long as the scales come out so that the vapors of the great humors can come out;
and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.
And if the swelling is spread out everywhere; and it is manifestly wasted, so you should apply the cauterizing of these fire cauterizations that we have said on the head, and one cautery on the nape, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the coccyx and another nearby, and two above the two shoulders; and two above the sides, and two above the tendons of the breast, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the back lower leg, so you do not burn them;
and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when I make more cauterization, it brings more help, and multiplies the benefit;
and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as healthy people do, because the body is already all corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of iron.
After the cure, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When inflammation comes to any member and is treated by medications and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the quarter. then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes a cauterization at the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is removed, the swelling remains.
and anyway no one intervenes unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves that move the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is worthless, then cauterize it with a cautery deep enough, according to the quantity of the humor, until the swelling is removed, and its color changes.
then mix flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of hen and blood of crane, each in equal parts. and mix it all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
the cure for chancres by cauterization
When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you want to arrest it, so cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the perimeter of the chancre.
And wise people say that one makes a fire cauterization also in the middle of the ulcer;
and anyway it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen some times;
and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, at the cauterization called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it tarries to die or due to the superfluity that it makes or due to the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or due to the weather; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauterizations, piercing; After that. For it will hasten to kill.
And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with whatever is on hand:
And place your hand in the midst of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterizations have pierced the core, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them outside in this manner as if the course of the disease were alleviated.
Afterwards cure him until he is completely healed.
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a wasting away of member, for it wastes away the members just as fire consumes dry straw.
If you see this disease in a place that can suffer from fire cautery together, then arrange the cauteries with small and great nails, according to what is needed at the location where the disease is.
Afterward, cauterize all around until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas a poultice made with oil as long as the burns of fire are removed, and all corruption is gone.
After the ointment treatment has generated flesh.
And if you see after three days that sound flesh does not arise, then it is good;
and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted flesh.
And this remedy is sometimes used in place of fire cautery due to medicine's agreement in that location;
but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicinal water in its division: Take what you have need of.
of boils that come to the feet Many times it happens that on the feet by default a disease is born which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large gap that hurts the foot.
And the fire cauterization of this disease is done in two ways. To know it is by fire cauterization and cauterization with hot water.
Fire cautery is such that you should heat the iron like a blacksmith's pen, and make it of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and have subtle margins.
After put all heat on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail. And leave it thus for three days until it begins to show purulence. Then make a poultice of wild mulberries pounded with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be detached from its roots.
Then treat the joint with oil, anointing it as much as is needed until it is healed.
And if they are converted by outward signs on the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply water cauterization. and it is in such a manner: take a brick of earth or iron, or a pin of wood, and place it on the nail and the other one, that is to say for small warts. and place the brick on it so that it surrounds everything, then put a little bit of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you go so that the edge of the brick comes to the root of the nail, and then the hot water can find its way deep down to the root.
and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it so, and it will uproot itself entirely down to all its roots.
So treat one after another, until you have reached all those within the body, then cure the humors which cause flesh.
When some shiver from cold or numbness, or from quartan fever or another, then it is necessary that you make him have 4 cauterizations or 5 on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine. and with fire cautery or weights, and on the stomach for olive oil cautery;
so let it shake, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
Sometimes appear on the outside of the body, or foul-smelling blisters, that come from great corrupted matter.
if necessary at first when they appear that one does fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, by which the point is seized with fire, or a long Aristolochia root, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
And whenever one cauterizes at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow forward anymore, but are broken off the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there occur great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the afterdeath, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a member, and similar things; and it is very grievous thing to restrain.
And yet whenever this happens to someone, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it hard until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more drips out.
then set the olive oil cautery on fire with multiple small and large ones until they are all red.
then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is running, and put it on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is staunched.
And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to make those one after another until the blood is stopped.
and beware that you don't burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
and know that when a vein does not flow from the artery, one cannot well sustain oneself even when the artery is great, if it is not by one of the four ways that we have said: or through burning, or by extracting it when not well treated, or by a strong bandage of thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to constrict blood; and be tied and steadied accordingly.
Who will administer the stanching of blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting burning things on, or similar things, unless it is not effective.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, then one should place the tip of their index finger on the wound in the vein as we said, and stretch it well until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein. and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often until it is very cold so that the blood is frozen and thickened and constricted.
and make inquiries beforehand as to those things which he needs for cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all about every disease in which it is necessary to apply fire cautery or hot medicine, and the reasons, causes, and instruments of cauteries.
and I have put the first chapter at the beginning, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way, so that one may find more easily what one desires.
And thus, dear son, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to be more cautious.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to take a foolish risk. For many ways of people come into cures. Those who come from such people have so identified with their illness that they would die easily because of the desperation they find in their illness, and the magnitude of their wickedness. And one should be afraid of these.
And from those who give you their opinion and say: Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful.
It is not fitting that you agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your avarice, and do not foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of and can gain control of.
and use prognostication and indication in the treatments of your illnesses, so that salvation may be converted.
and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and remembrance in praise.
Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Now I have concluded this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have divided from the head to the end, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this sickness often comes to children during childbirth, and when the nurse holds the child's head too tightly.
and sometimes it comes from a known cause that one is unaware of.
And I have never seen this sickness except in children, and all the ones that I have seen died soon. and for that reason it seems to me that it is worth proceeding slowly with this work in such cases.
And I saw one child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer be sustained.
and the moisture became so great that it was dead, and this moisture is gathered below the bone on top of the shoulder blade, between the vertebrae and the bone.
and the work is such that if the moisture is between the vertebrae and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you cut a wide incision into the head.
and let it grow as long as two of us, until the moisture flows;
and see to the form of the spatula-like thing;
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that each part of the head has its commissures open, and when you press it with your hand from inside, the water jumps forth quickly, and this does not respond to you; so it is necessary that you cut three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. After binding the incisions with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, and leaving it thus for five days;
then loosen it, and treat the wound with tents and anointing, and let the head dry off, and then feed the patient dried meat mixed with moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another manner of incision is to look where the size of the abscess opens up, and the joining of water.
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens up, and the filling of water, and do what you can with it.
and beware that you don't cut the artery; and then comes forth blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is fire cauterization with which one will sear both arteries.
It is necessary, when you see them cut open, that the patient make ready his head; after rubbing the area with an asperous cloth until the arteries appear, then take away the patient's neck from the entire cloth; Then look where the vein beats, and the pulsations of one and the other are after the ears, and they are responded.
Then mark the pulses of both, then cut one and the other with a sharp knife two inches apart, as far as the vein reaches to the bone, and let it be by the width of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in two like a pair of scissors across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will spring forth continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space three fingers deep, then mark with an incision and cut to the bone.
and as much blood is to be let out if it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery.
Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the suprachondrium, then cut so that abscesses do not come there, then stop the wound and bind, and the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine When ancient migraine comes, and acute cataract, due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and old forgotten habits and similar things, and he has been treated by methods of medical cures and all this does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes sure the hairs on his temples are well-retracted, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well and can be felt apart from some men who are too cold;
and if it is felt, the patient should loosen his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and rise up in hot water until the artery becomes manifestly apparent. then take the spatula whose shape is as follows: then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then grasp it at the top with tweezers, and part the veins that are below each part.
and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the unguent, and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two veins. For she is not cut, so does not flow all the blood at once.
And take out six cups of blood, down to three.
and if the artery is large, then it's necessary that you tie it in two loops with a strong double thread of silk, so that no bleeding occurs before the wound heals, and a decrease in blood comes.
then remove the excess that is between the two loops at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, apply the fire cautery with a cutlery knife just to the bone until the joints are cleared.
and that is the mother's work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion. For cauterizing is helpful in finishing moles: therefore it is of greater help to moles.
Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents.
and when you loosen them, take care with dry medicines that bring forth flesh, and of poultices, until they are healed;
and if there is no stoppage in the artery as long as you are working on it, then hasten to close with cautery, or use the location of vitriol and strain it to your hand that the blood be stopped. and if you don't have that available, then put it on the wound so that the blood is frozen, and apply the location of cold water until the bleeding ceases, and strain it as needed.
And there should be a large gap between the two knives, and then when you have signed off on the two holes, and you place the hot iron on top so that it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein into two parts. and let them be separated between the two shoulders because they are not joined together with this fire cautery at all.
and that is the form of the cautery:
and that which is more suitable and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cauterizing instrument cutting into two parts, but the cutting parts should be well spaced so as to withstand their heat longer. For when the cuttings are too dense, they retain less heat.
of tears When tears are flowing from the eyes that are above the forehead of the head of hair, and there is no profit at all from medicine being applied to it, and you see the patient's face growing red, and feels the forehead burning as if it trembles; and if the skin is tender and moist so that the hairs of paper are fallen, and the papers are scorched and burned by the heat of tears, then there is need for this care. And the ancients called it "contused cure", and that is to make three incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, in equal parts according to the length of the forehead.
And the ancients called it "contused cure", and that is to make three incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, in equal parts according to the length of the forehead. and be one of the cuts like two going all around in front, and the others go up to the ribs above the papers, and take care of incising the arteries that are on either side above the papers;
and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jawbones, and be each wound the size of three fingers across the joint;
and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to absorb the blood, then pour the vinegar solution through two parts where this is the shape:
from the incision which is below the temple just to the second incision; and scrape off all the keratin that is between the two cuts up to the furrow on the bone, then do the other part from the middle incision just to the other second, and then draw out this vinegar solution. So insert into the first cut the instrument called "culterelle", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and soft on the other side, not sharp at all, and this is the form:
And place the knife cutting towards the fatty part of the shoulder blade, and the knife soaping towards the bone, and push it in as far as it comes to the middle incision.
And tie all the bandages that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous right up to where the key opens, and then make another cut in the middle slit right up to the other edge.
and then draw out equal blood, and express the place by the taken blood;
then put a cloth made of old cotton in each slit, and put wet cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and ashes on top, and make sure that no abscesses form.
and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great plenty of cold water, then apply a balm of basilicum with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until they are healed.
When anyone comes with a long-standing catarrh accustomed to it, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakening the sight, and burned papers. and the hair falls out, and the head is filled with a deep pain, and the patient is worn out; then you should know by these accidents that those materials and the cautery do not come forth except from many veins, and the mother cares for what is there, so it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to rear his forehead, then make a great gash in the forehead and another of considerable width inside. And begin at the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and withdraw your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two lips of the incision a piece of old cotton cloth, and tie it with linen; then bind it above with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot apostemes;
when it is removed, then you should rub the bone until cartilage begins to form, and then treat it with things that excite flesh, which makes it grow.
In such a manner: Take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of saffron, and make a plaster. and administer it to these wounds in order to expel all sorts of corruption.
Of the stopping of ears
All that falls into ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beasts, or a piece of mining iron, or similar things like iron; or seed, such as jasmine, vetches, peas; or flowing things like water and soft mud and similar substances.
When it pierces the ear or in some other way does not fit at all with the ear and does not grow in the ear, then place the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, if it yields any drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then administer an extraction; and make it stink with conditions, and stop his nostrils when the stinking comes, and put around his ear pieces of cloth or wool; and it stands above the ear.
Many times harm comes from this treatment;
and if it does not come harm, then provide extraction with fine forceps, of which the shape is this:
If it jumps out from the forceps, that's good;
if not, then provide extraction with a fine needle of small double edge;
and if it does not jump out through that, then make a rope of linen and insert the end of the rope or the hole of the ear strongly, and stop what is around the rope with wax so that the blood cannot enter with the rope; then pull it out forcefully, because many times harm comes from this as we have said;
and if harm does not come in that manner, then take some glue of which it takes the birds, and put in some instrument that is sharp for this to do, and wrap a little cotton around; Then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and make it stick.
And if she doesn't burst forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut off the ear before the abscess comes forth and spasms.
and the manner of cutting is that you first let the patient's head bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract the blood according to its natural flow, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fatty or bony area. and make the incision as round as a moon, until you come to the stone, then scrape it according to your power, and quickly suck out the bone.
and care for it until it is healed.
And if there are grains within and they swell, then administer an extraction.
and if he cannot come out, so administer a spoonful of subtle medicine according to this form: and apply an incision to that lump.
But do not do it when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have cut it into many pieces;
then extract with subtle forceps and a sucker, just as we said, so that the extraction is easy.
In the water that flows into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use condimental sneezing first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And be steady above that ear itself where the water is. If it jumps forth because of that, it's good.
if not, then take many pieces according to the length of your should be thin and light, and heat them slightly in the fire; and put one or two holes in the patient's ear, and lift up from below with his fingers from the other side, and strike with another piece on top of the piece that is in the ear; and do not cease to pile stone upon stone until the water flows out entirely, and thus it will flow entirely;
and if you see, then take a vine, and put one end in the ear, and wrap the other end around it with fire until the thickest part of the vine is burned;
then do the same to other vines until the water flows out entirely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal, if it is small, like a hedgehog and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is large enough to be felt, perform an extraction by forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of earwigs from ears, when you have cured it as we have said in the division and in treating with distilled things, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear to the sun: If no wound is apparent, then treat with subtle tweezers, and if not, take the cord of which the form is there:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then pull strongly on the whole cord; do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, then wrap cotton around the cord as I said in the stone;
and if they do not emerge as we said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat on the distillations;
and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which the form is there as you see: And it is of silver or lead a large vessel below to small holes, and above over for distilling.
and to press inside the distillation with the instrument of lead well-made for that, and if you see take the razor and envelop it around the pointed cotton. then pour out your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the pipe, and the pipe be in the ear.
then put everything inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or dripped out of the ear. and the patient will sense it inside, and let the distillation be placed over a pot warmed by fire so that it can be distilled in the ear. and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping of ears
No child is born without a single perforation in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through the bursting of a wound or a piece of bone within the ear, and these bursting things sometimes go all the way into the ear so that one can no longer see;
and sometimes it happens that the perforation is very large and one sees very well.
Then the one that goes all the way in, if one cannot see it, is for serious healing and many preparations; and as for the one that one sees, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity appearing, then the work is complete in all this space that is the form:
And be gentle and careful on both sides, before and behind, so that it does not hurt the ear;
If the opilation is of a new-born bone or the flesh of the ear, so hold it with fine pincers and cut it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the opilation is done perfectly in the ear, then take a subtle and light rasor and heat it slightly by the fire, then put it in the flesh of the ear.
If you sense the opilation from which the patient feels grief to hear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to wound the nerves of the ear;
Then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian pitch. Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with red water, and powder on vitriol brews;
And if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put on another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then heal him until he is sound.
And if there is a discharge of blood, then dip a sponge and wring it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
These leaves that come from the eyes when they are moist and dry, so you should stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off a spatula of its roots; then place it on the glassy boil.
And if it does not blister, then cauterize with a subtle lens-shaped cautery, and the cauterizing after the incision is good.
and many times repair, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burnt and do not return.
Of the Hellebore Many times come leaves from the eyes that seem like hoarhound in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a collection of thick moisture above and below the paper. The works are such:
The works are such: Take care if the gravel (or stone) moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know;
Then make the wound then wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with forceps and cut.
If you cannot cut it without piercing a little bit of the paper, it will not trouble the patient;
and if the wound is great, then sew it up with a stitch and care for it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not apply force, because the swelling will restore it soon and produce flesh.
And if the stone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn it over with the paper, take hold of the stone with forceps, and cut and press it from one side and the other;
and if the paper is displaced by incision, this does not matter;
and when the wound is cut, let flow a salted water of aqua, and care for the place where the flesh is injured until the patient is healed.
Of the fat of eyes Exinach is a fat that is injected into the sheets of paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts them a lot, and they come to the catharist at dawn, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes;
and therefore they lie down on their faces soon, and sleep above, and have their papers beneath their eyelids moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the lid at your elbows and feel the exinach between them.
And the way of the work is that the patient puts his head on the same side;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then put it on him; and press it with your hands on both sides, so that the contents are assembled within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture a groove about as wide as the incision one makes when opening a vein;
and cut the skin so deeply that you come to the contents; and in several dispositions the contents come out of the groove, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
then take it out in one piece of cloth wrapped between your hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread;
and guard that you do not insert into the wound, so as to reach all the way to the eye, so as to cause damage.
And if the scalpel does not open in the beginning of the wound, so then slightly widen the wound a little until it appears.
then pull it as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and water, and place on the wound, and strain with bindings.
And if such men who burn their gauze and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then let them take care until they are healed.
And if an abscess comes to the hot joint, then treat it with poultices soothing until they are healed.
of hairs of paper When other hairs grow than those that are natural, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and cause to come forth habits of diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and pimples, so that it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes.
and this is the cure according to four manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medication according to what is written in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by threads, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
If she has changed, it is good. if not, then put a needle on all the thread above; and be this on the edge of the paper where the hairs grow below these hairs, and treat the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
then make in the part below the paper, below the adjusted hairs, all along the spatula's edge, from the great tear to the small one.
then pull out the thread and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then sign on the paper an image of enema, like the branch of myrtle, and although it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see unfolding the paper which is divided into all.
And if someone has need, they cut off a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened.
Then fill all the spatula up above the two lines that you have signed, and start with great largesse just a little. and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the knife into one of the two corners of the key, then scrape all.
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of an needle at all the thread of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the excess threads above the two knots at all gluing things, if you see making this.
and if not, then don't bother, and leave the stitch and threads just for three days or four.
then cure the wound without stitches of things drying and constraining, for the paper comes to life at the closing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitch is bitter (as they said in olden times), and this is work without fear. and if
and if and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, at three uncials severed according to the form which is here:
then cut what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
And if you have no power to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and pass it through the shape; and pass the other thread alongside the great gutter, and the second thread alongside the small one, and tie them together equally between your two threads;
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have signed, as we have counted, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with ointment and similar balm calming;
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the parchment is converted:
if it is necessary that you use what we have said about cutting;
but the cut in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of cankers is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make an incision within according to what I have said, then make two cankers by art, and two subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula are; and tie the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the parchment of oil, and strain the two cankers from the two parts together; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and turn black and hard, until it falls off by itself.
If he delays, if he needs medical attention, then cure him until he is healed.
and when the wound is closed, and the paper (presumably a dressing) has been lifted away, and the hairs can no longer prick.
and this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure and according to this length and width.
the work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert a soft and fine silk thread into it. then tie the knots together and tie one to the other gently, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length.
then order in the chase the other fine silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the thread together.
then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
and let it be done in the sun so that the work is revealed, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle into the whole length of the chase at the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly as you pull it up over the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair up to the chase, and push that hair into the chase if there is one, two, three, or more.
Then pull out your hand so that the hairs grow forth all over the chase on paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not grow forth with it, then pull out the chase downwards to all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase grows forth from the pore above and you can see it by the sight of the eye.
Then pull out the chase and the thread, and let it rest for two days or three, until the hair grows back in its place and the scar forms above.
And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from natural beards, and raise it up with that one you leave behind, until they are elongated and then lift it.
Of the corruption of the oil. When this sickness called "aleacrati" comes to the eye, so there are two ways in it:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or an incision, or a burning, and from similar things.
And the way of working on it is that you cut open the suturing, and divide the lips of it, and put inside linen cloths, and tie it until it is healed;
and it is not necessary that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, then the disease comes back worse than the first one;
but your work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or althea and flaxseed are cooked, and oil of yarrow melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and cures those.
And the treasure of your care is that you take heed to ensure it does not break apart according to its former form;
And these works that we have said are not far from the remedies of this disease, that it may recover according to its former form.
This disease which is below and is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and gash and cauterization and similar things;
and the way of the work is that you take a needle with double thread, and thrust it into the flesh, and make it pierce from left to right, so that the threads may come out on both sides of the flesh;
then cut away the flesh above the needle, and make it split apart at the spatula's broad edge. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good;
If not, then take the razor and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or on the inside of the paper.
and be the corners of the two cuts at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter that has no "I Grecs";
then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its edges is worn down underneath, from what follows the paper, then join the two severed parts and sew them with a thread of wool.
then apply the treatment for this that we have said about softening medicines and tents until they are healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or an opening or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a smooth incision underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what is mentioned before. Then dislocate between the two boards of a tent, as I said.
Then dislocate between the two boards of a tent, as I said. and one must work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine to do all they can to bring back the figure to its natural form.
and the patient himself, according to what it is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
When this swelling occurs in such a way that the paper above is stuck with oil white and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up.
and stretch with pincers, until you extract what is stuck in the subtle sputum, which should not be too rough nor too cutting, lest the patient cannot endure that the sputum too rough nor injures the oil.
and let your incision, from which you cut away that assembled part, be slight so that the paper returns to its natural form.
and let all that assembled part be healed, and make no incision in the salty eye water, nor raise the sweet water, nor cause inflammation.
then put a linen cloth between the paper and the eye, and place on the eye a moistened woolen cloth in abundance of egg white. and after three days use cooling remedies and things that soothe until it is healed.
Know that the ring is in two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard ganglion, and another which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cools it in the pincers, so it cannot be undone.
and one and the other likeness begins towards the great sewer, and grows little by little until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your lap, then you work on the eyes. and lift the paper to your hand, then curl the finger like scissors of small doubleure, and stretch it upwards. then take a needle, and insert the horsehair, or oxhair, or beefhair, and make it strong. and double the point of the needle a little and insert it among the fingers, and pierce through to the entire needle, and tie the finger with thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape off all the hair from the side of the finger that is above the skin and down to the joint, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct into all the subtle spaces and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear duct as it was before the incision, so that the body may not come accustomed to tears.
and sometimes the nails grow only to the fingernail or to the hair. then one scrapes off all the fatty scum from which this form comes:
And beware that the scum does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the pimple is not pierced.
and after the incision pours into the oil a little bit of boiled silk and makes a litargy from it, and leaves it until the next day. then the doctor does what is needed so that they are healed.
And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle in, and the fingernails cannot enter, many times this appearance of nails is cured by medicine.
and grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it cover, then work with the patient's oil and take the scum lightly according to this form: And gently remove the scale from above subtly; and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason hastens there, then drip from your mouth into a cataract made of litargire and red chili pepper mixture, and stop the eye until the next day.
If no obstacle is found in the eye, as an abscess forms, then wash it with milk, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the skin on the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it from the onion, and cut off a part but not all, so that tears do not come forth.
Then drip into the eye red chili pepper mixture made of litargire.
The eyes of some men never become red, and cover the prune with a yellowish substance, restrain above the paper, and turn to the backside, and seem like a rose made of pumice stone;
and the work is such that the patient places his head on your shoulder, then he works the eyes, and cools all that flesh with suitable unguents to it, and sustains it with strength;
then pare the first flesh, and go on paring to the razor's edge until the end, and take care that you do not cut into the eye during the operation;
and let the incision be like that of the spatula which we said in the incision of the tongue and with small forces one takes away the shag, just as the form shows after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of safflower or you distill a red-colored liquid and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the eye a cloth soaked in egg white, so that it may be assured of hot abscess;
and if there is no longer anything, and the blood rushes to the surface, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave off and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make the joints set in the oil by this resemblance.
But it is also necessary that you ease the treatment of each weak joint according to natural ways; and by the accidental way, in iron work;
and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that those members are bearing up under this treatment.
If there are veins that are red and covered on the eye, and tolerate the work of their sight and weaken the eye always.
It is necessary therefore at first to observe what the joint is like, in which it swells, and whether it is inflamed, and there is no other disease besides the swelling; then bind the joint in this manner:
instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins throughout all the way according to his wisdom, and let the veins be subtle doubles according to this form:
And let the two ointments be by degrees in one mass according to this form:
then tie those veins subtly and extract the blood hour after hour until you see the veins move away from the eye;
and beware that you do not obscure the eye with the points of the spatulae, and perform this work at the hour of noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not slip up on those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill in the eye a bitter green and red liquid to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous glands.
And if you are unable to tie it all up in that hour, then apply a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are assuaged and you are assured of the abscess being hot, then recommence according to this manner which is before until he is healed.
and this is the form of the powers:
The doctor is called "arissati" fistula:
When you cure it by cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is reason to open up the abscess where it should be, and extract all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove it with all the instruments of which this is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief", and make it smooth up to the point where it is not rough again, and be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
And put it on top of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your thumbs, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed;
and make so every time then restore the place with medicinal remedies.
if the wound is sealed and there is no bleeding, and the bowels are sealed and remain thus for 40 days, and it does not fester and is not abscessed, and evil consequences do not occur, know that it is healed.
but if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to its natural outlet according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time by fire and by old medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take a file according to this form, and let the point of iron be at three angles, and let the file be worn down just to the head as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the socket, and withdraw your hand from the patient's point, then turn all the file until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it as if the blood flows if he holds his hand on his nose.
and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is formed and hardened, then the matter goes to nothing. for it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction to sight or decrease in vision, it is necessary that you bind the patient.
then heal, then apply cupping glasses or cauterize in order to draw out the blood, then put a poultice on the eye made of aloe and aloes and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye and embalm it with bandages and drapings.
and the manner of the drapings is that you take soft drapings, and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of another according to the amount that the eyes need.
then strain it upwards with a firm bandage, and reapply the poultices to draw out without wounding.
then remove the poultices and let the oil be strained day and night, and if it becomes swollen, then you should compress it tightly.
then remove the swelling after a day and a night, and if you see the oil repairing, that is good.
if not; then reapply the poultice and bindings, and the swelling and poultices until it is healed.
The bursting forth of a grape-like vein When disruption comes to the uveous membrane, then it opens up, and comes forth with paper-like flakes like grains of resin, and it is dreadful to behold.
then if you see it cover, the work is such that you should insert a needle into the root of the affected part below up to where it is above, then insert another needle where there is a doubled thread from the corner of the eye. and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its setting;
then tie the loop of the doubled thread and bind a part of the vein around, and hold it well, then pull out the needle and put on a linseed oil moistened in abundance.
and leave it so that the thread takes hold with the vein, then apply the oil to things comforting as long as the wound is healed.
and at no time is the wound restrained by the vein except each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes into the very font of the oil, and dry out the moisture albugine and descend the eyes, and enter it immediately;
then pull it out when it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not far from a boil that is assembled in the eye, resembling a descending water, and it's not water;
and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a well-prepared and straight seat, then take hold of the head with your two hands, and move it so much as you see the boil rise up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and do not descend, and let the light go away, and see the patient's things just as he used to;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the boil's descent is not prepared just as we said.
then make the patient sit in your hands, then take a fine spatula and do on the keratinous cloth one piece by the continuation of the conjunctive with the keratinous cloth and the crown, until the boil comes out;
and when it is issued, then distill in hot water with honey mixed with equal parts of honey and melissa or fenugreek boiled with honey, and then be treated by another treatment until it is healed.
from the waters of the eye We have the likenesses of waters in the division, and what is needed for piercing; so that it works according to health.
You should have the patient sit in your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and bind the healthy eye very tightly.
Then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed.
Then take in your right hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your left hand if the eyes are right-handed, the instrument which is called "almagda".
Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the width of a thumb in that corner of the eye nearest to the smaller tear duct, then insert the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so it pierces into the eye, and feel that almagda comes into the empty thing;
and it is fitting that the measure of the path of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the espace which is from the prune to the end of the nourishment; and this is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneous cloth, and then place the instrument just below where the water is, then express it under one way after another.
The patient sees what is going on now, if he looks at him and the instrument is in his hand.
After you rest for a little, and if the water rises again to the second way, place force with the instrument, and when it is fully seated and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by rotating your hand little by little.
and then put back in water a little bit of salt crystal, and leave it under this oil inside. Then put a poultice or a moist cloth of linen soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg white on the wound, and bind it with clean oil.
We and those who are of our time put a common brew with an abundance of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
And then just prick the joint alone, and not go too deep by much, but make it subtle, then put in alum, as we have said.
and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient and the doctor to come, in which it sleeps on its back in this dark place.
and be still of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head to the right or to the left, and remain according to his disposition for three days.
then loosen him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day;
and it is not necessary for you to do this in the work of the cure or after incising now, but rather that you ease him, because the water rises hastily.
If an abscess forms, then you should lance the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards that which soothes the abscess.
And when it is eased, then lance the eye and put a poultice on its face for covering any day, and be in that dark house.
And then go out of the dark house little by little, and adjust yourself to your condition;
and know that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from the land of Irach, who told us that in his land he had seen a man with an almagda wound, which makes water come out, but I never saw anyone like it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of old. and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of madness, because one who does not know them sees it;
and are of earth properly: And the ends of these should be of this same subtlety, and the last in three sharp angles.
Sometimes birthmarks or freckles appear unevenly distributed, which causes some to resemble scorptions in many places;
and if one has such birthmarks or has one enchanted with fiery color, and another soft of pale color. In that birthmark which is soft and not enchanted, it is necessary that you have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that birthmark which is soft and not enchanted, it is necessary that you have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and apply the onion to those birthmarks, and treat them fiercely; then do what you can sustain by the subtle and acute judgment of your part, as long as you know that that birthmark is entirely open.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, so work on all the instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. and if it is not inflamed, or abscess appears, then hasten as is fitting.
and if it's malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize as much as the blood is staunched and all the dressings are removed, then pour or apply neat oil and vinegar. If the poultice works, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed.
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, to which instruments do not come to cut.
then it is necessary that you put a thread of linen about an inch thick there, and have it soaked in oil for us, and have between each night's space what should be or less. and put the patient's head against the pillow in his neck so that it is at its power, and pull towards the scent until it comes down through the neck into the mouth;
and many times do this to children in schools, and it is a light thing for one who wants to make them do so;
then hold the head that comes from the neck in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and tie one after the other as we are on the thread.
Do this as long as you know that the night has not corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the neck just like before.
do this for three days or more, until the oils corrode all that is remaining of flesh.
and then put on him a leather thong for some days until he is healed, and if he needs drying medicines, so he uses them;
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills oils and medicines or something:
And it is made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and leads in the same way;
and if you see, then make a closed tube, and let the instruments be full to purge the head;
and have a handguard at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
From the flesh on the nail.
Many times a disease appears on the head called "telul", and it grows and becomes large over time, until it is visible to look at.
and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the top at the beginning, and remove all fur, then put on the cautery or burning medicine;
and if you wait to cover it until it is great, then beware if it is hard, of a foul colour, of poor sense:
for it will not be touched by iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut into it at some time, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not foul colour, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut it in such a way as to remove fear, and cure the limb of things constricting and binding.
Know that when solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, more than in some men.
It is therefore necessary that this happens in someone, so look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then stitch the two lips together with a seam, then heal it until he is sound.
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their keratin until they heal, then stitch the two lips together with a seam, and bind them tight, and powder with powdered blood of dragon, and burn incense; and put on powders a piece of ointment or other ointment suitable, and let it be until it clears up by itself, then cure with oil as long as it is healed.
The method of the stitching is that you bring together the edges: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have informed you.
Of lip abscesses.
In the mouth, abscesses often arise within hard, resembling tiny peas, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each one, and take as many pinches and clip in each part;
then apply a poultice to the place after the incision of vinegar broth, until the blood is staunched.
and then treat the area with ointment, and care for the joint of dry things until it is healed.
Often a white spot appears on the gums which the ancient people called "albulus";
so you should hold it with forceps, and cut to its root, and let the pulp or blood run.
then place on the joint a vitriol ointment, or other drying and constricting powders;
and if the sore returns after the incision, and this often happens, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cauterization;
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are foul and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
so you should make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in thy faith, and receive the teeth or gums that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other spots, until they are cleansed;
and if you take away what is at the first reason, it's good; but if not, then recommence on the second day and the third, until you have everything cleansed;
and know that the teeth have need of various forms of instruments to clean, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which one removes tartar from the teeth has other forms than the one with which one cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others are to be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, for this should not happen at all. for it is a very high substance just up to when one has no excuse to regret.
When the patient is constrained to go out, it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth aching. Many times the patient's pain was so great that they thought it was in their tooth, and believed that it was a holy tooth, and had the good tooth pulled out. and yet the pain does not depart from him on account of this, until the bad humor departs, for we have already wanted to do this with these saints;
and when you are well certain of the tooth's pain, it is necessary that you scrape all around the tooth with a spatula very strongly to keep the gum from all sides;
then move it with your hands or fine pincers at the first pace and pace, until it is well extracted, then secure the pincers well. and let the patient's hip be between your holy knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it inside from each side lightly, and move it as you did first.
And if the tooth is perforated and eaten away, then you should fill it with cloths, where the holes are. and if you strain it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break while being strained.
and it is necessary to carefully cover around the gum for loosening the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and leave one part, and reinsert it into the patient through the malicious root causing greater pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who, because of their haste and boldness, sometimes break the carriage and do not bring about what we have described.
but sometimes bring about great harm through the decay of those roots that remain, or by breaking the carriage, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is loose, wash it with wine or with vinegar and with oil;
and if there is bleeding and it comes, which often happens, then apply the place with a piece of vitriol crushed.
and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, by which one should extract the teeth first, should be long-pointed and thick-gripped, so that they do not double back when you pull out the tooth;
and these are the forms: And have large handles so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth to keep them from slipping.
of the roots of teeth When the roots remain to be pulled out, it is necessary that you put a moistened cotton cloth on the wound for one or two days until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the head seems like the beak of a hawk;
and they should be made inside as if with a file and that is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire layer of skin around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a scraper, by which this is its shape:
And let it be large and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out for this reason, it is good.
if not, then use all the instruments, by which forms come forth hereafter:
And if you help with this instrument that has two handles, this is its shape: and other tools that are in front of the roots of teeth, and this instrument which seems like great forceps, this is its shape:
And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments of dent are; and also other instruments which are not counted;
and wise and subtle masters find by themselves the instrument that is suitable for each patient's disease, according to their work and the malady they present, for there are certain diseases where ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if it does not break the bone or any other bones, or where it can be done, then he seeks out the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, by which the form comes forth hereafter:
And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it may not escape but can be held and removed.
and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone and it is small, so that it returns to all this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, and especially in young girls, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is next to the other tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be straightened or trimmed.
then draw it; and if it is stuck with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is like this and looks like a small beak, and has an iron point sharp to the tip.
And the edge grows gradually day by day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that one can file it, then use a similar file as this is its shape:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles;
and in a little lime, the tooth peels away bit by bit over a few lighter days, so that it does not move until it falls out.
then the gum is smooth at the end and there is no rough edge, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then it is necessary to file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the tooth in front is loosened, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without choking, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, and this does not work;
so they must be restrained by a thread of gold, for the sons of silver become green and perish, but the gold does not change once.
and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the proportion of space between the teeth;
et if you see the teeth to be aligned, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the jawbone between my teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach bleeding just to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start the covering just to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and carefully, until it does not move anymore;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then tie the jawbone with thread to a pair of tongs, and assemble them, and reposition between the healthy tooth and thus so it does not hurt the tongue;
and then leave it so tight as long as it can stay that way, and if it comes loose or the thread breaks, then strain it with another thread;
If it remained and served thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the addressing of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, little by little, just as we have said;
and does not intervene except for one who is wise and enduring, and sometimes one makes the shape of a cow's tooth of bone, and puts it in the place where there is a defect, and holds it so as we have said, and stays and serves thus long.
Sometimes this fault comes from under the tongue or by nature, which is born in this way; or through the accidental wound that has been healed;
and the work is such that you work on the patient's mouth, and have their head in your healthy hand, and lift up the tongue;
Then tie the nervous ligament of the thigh, so that the tongue is released from its station, and if there is stiffness or swelling, and it's a sudden wound, then insert the unguent and tie the ligament;
and take care that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is below.
and when you have done, then lift up the wound of rose and easy water, or cold water, and put a linen tent under the tongue;
and dress the patient's wound each night, so that the swelling cannot harden.
And if there is a flow of blood, then put vitriol powder on the wound; and if the bleeding increases, then burn it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for that. then treat it with another treatment until it is healed,
and if you see it is a foul or black or hard boil, so that the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle;
and if it is declining towards the bladder, and there is moisture, so that it discharges pus, and makes a fine sputum, and delivers from one side and another; and if the blood flows at your work, so put on a vinegar poultice until it is staunched, then return to your work as long as you are drawing out all the pus;
then lift up the head of the neck and shoulder, and treat with other treatments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat Sometimes a lump comes into the throat which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two tonsils, and when you cure them as we have said in the section, and they are not healed, then beware:
If it is an abscess of long duration with little sense and a dull color, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the avoidance of excessive bleeding; but let it remain until it is dead, and then you will lance it, or it will burst on its own;
and if it is of white color and reopens, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see if the abscess has calmed down and is pacified.
Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hands be in thy hand, and the servant hold the mouth open and take the tongue between his hands, and press the tongue downwards onto all the instrument, so that it takes its form.
and let it be of silver or refined lead, just as sharp knives:
Can't you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the pincers and fix it in the almond, and draw the thread above as far as you can;
and don't touch anything with the cloths, then cut at the instrument, of which there is the form, that seems like one force; and yet the head is curved, and from one side to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
And if you do not have this instrument present, then use pincers, by which the form appears: And be cut on one side and on the other named;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water or cooked skin of pomegranates, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; Then care for the patient until they are healed.
and sometimes abscesses arise in the throat besides those two almonds; if so, then cut them as the two almonds grow together.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely the abscess of little sense;
and I had already well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like that for a day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced its way out through both holes of the nose.
I then hastened at once, and placed one onion in it, then the tumor burst open and a large portion of pus came out;
then I made another incision on the other side of the abscess, and opened up her mouth and pressed her tongue.
After incising these abscesses, and cutting off a part, and only one drop of blood issued forth. And thus the passages of the throat were dislodged from the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting off that abscess for a long time.
And the abscess re-crossed again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large.
Then I bound it and cauteryed it inside the throat: Thus it remained without growing;
And I departed from those parts, and only God did something with them after me.
of the vein
When the swelling goes down to the vein, and it is emptied and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is under a thick and rounded one, then it is called "vein".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess has been calmed, and it is subtle, so you must cut.
and she who is roundly assembled and is not long; and she is sanguine or of a flesh color or black, so you must avoid cutting into it. Because there is great danger on the patient.
It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its swelling and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument which we have mentioned above. then stick the onion into the eye, and train it downwards, and cut with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural boundary;
for if you intervene more, so it troubles to voice, and to word;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear to cover, you should use cunning at the cauterization of their sense of fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp as an edge. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and confesses with hot water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear. and use the handle of this instrument, which has this form:
And there is on the head a covering or where one puts the medicine, just as the hairs of a cauldron, and put the instrument over all the medicine on the ulcer.
and the patient should sit on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat and the wound.
Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the vein, for the amount of time equal to half an hour, until you see it congealed and the medication's abrasions are soothed.
And if you see, take cotton and envelop it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and fill the instrument with all the cotton in the cane above, until the cotton is applied to the vein.
and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and check after four days or five.
And if you need to reapply the medicine cauterization, then reapply it, and after the cauterization, apply a poultice around the vein, with cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse all that is around the medicine.
and let them be bathed with cold water, and treat with gargling so long as they are cleansed.
This cure is safer than incision, not the fire cautery;
if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put air in it, and make it boil.
and the pot should be well glazed with hard earth, and inside the pot have an instrument carved according to this manner: And it should be of silver or lead, and one of the ends sealed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eardrum through the canal, until the eardrum is numbed.
afterwards it often renews itself, until the eardrum is dry, and be sure you do not do this at the beginning of the abscess's heating up, for many things happen there. and do not cause any harm except at the cutting of an abscess hot.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cord and put a goose quill inside the head, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat. for the goose quill does not allow the steam to weigh on the mouth, and it is good care together with health.
Often one should secure a piece of neck bone or fish spine, or nothing;
so then you should test what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing.
and what does not appear to you and is returned in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the things are thrust out through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a root of lettuce, or a fragment of dry bread; and then thread is attached to the sponge and then it is swallowed again; and when it comes out, if it gets stuck, and then you will pull it out;
and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of purling according to this form:
And the instrument should be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head lifted upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest all life come to it, nor push the bone inside;
and make sure that the patient pushes the instrument, for thus the thing is forced out; If the ball is below, or he pulls it far away from all the instruments evenly, so that it is far.
Of the sweat of the throat.
No bloodless remedy is medicine for the without-sense, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of remedies; and when it does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the sweat, then take it away with all small needles or fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if this doesn't work, then take a braided cord, and tie it around the patient's neck, then heat the iron rod at the end of the cord, and do this often. And if the patient is troubled by water all day.
then take a full view of cold water, and open the mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it to his hand often. and as soon as the blood feels the water, it should be stopped.
And if it does not stop as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asafetida, to the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
It happens many times, for it will fall without a target.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where it has burning coals, and the opening should be covered with a perforated cloth sheet in the middle, and on that hole should be the head of the instrument.
Then you cast your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in their mouth and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out but comes just to the sweat.
and the sweat will now fall, and if it does not fall, then you begin the fumigation again many times;
and the patient suffers thirst, and takes bitter things and salts, and does not drink water at all.
and then it is necessary that they issue forth by this governance.
The shape of the instrument with which one draws out pus is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved tweezers for inserting into the throat; and has the resemblance of a doctor's beak, and has the asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go;
Many likenesses of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings forth on this side and that in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting;
and it is in two manners, one of which is its own likeness, and because it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the bones that are at the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fatty tissue are different from those that come together in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if abscesses should not be pierced at all, until the pus is fully formed according to its completion;
and if there are such abscesses that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard and do not die according to their completion, just as those abscesses that are near joints.
For when abscesses come beneath joints, and one leaves it until it is rotting all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
Where the abscess is located below the main member, and if you delay the piercing until it is mortified, so it will harm the main member.
where it is located at the foundation, if one pierces it when it is dead;
and it is not necessary that you pierce an unripe abscess without complete digestion, except for one located at the foundation, which cannot be pierced to its depth and becomes elongated inside and thus a fistula forms; and it cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the departures of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the swelling and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and it is necessary that you make the puncture sit or lie dependent on the abscess, and where it opens up movements;
and the puncture should be long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no swelling. In those who ache, by consequence of that member.
And when abscesses are in the skin hardened, so it is best that you leave the puncture until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce before that, the body will be lengthened with the venom from it, and will be filled with much foul matter; and by chance harden the lips and the inner parts of him.
And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according as the members may need it.
And it is necessary that you bring out small abscesses, small pustules; and in great abscesses, great pustules, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the skin, and cover; When he is become as grey as the flags, and is wasted away, so it is necessary to do likewise as one does with infants:
and if they are split into three angles, and if there are those of which one cuts in the manner of myrtle leaves, just as abscesses of angels;
and if they are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar trimming.
Those who do not have a head, like a soft abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you make an incision completely.
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has gathered great pus, and you make an incision, so do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but only some part. then stop the abscess just until the next day, then do not touch anything above it; Make them so repeatedly by degrees, until the bowels open completely.
Meanwhile, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the pulse beats quickly sometimes with the issue of pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware.
Therefore, exercise great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound bleeds, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small. and if it's a clean incision, then try to apply linen or old cotton. and if it's a large abscess and there are many perforations, then you must bind each one with a tent so that they come together.
and if you have cut away a part of the abscess from the skin and wrapped it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or a dry cloth made from linen, free from moisture, and bind it just to the third day.
then the surgeon and the oil doctor until he is healed.
And if bleeding occurs at your work, then administer cold water and vinegar, and damp cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
And if the purging of blood persists, and he is administered government and care, and the powders that I have said are used in this book, and it is during the time of winter, and the lesions or abscesses are very nervous, then you should put on tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and hot oil.
and if it is in summer, and the lesions are fleshy, then you should put on wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
and then dissolve the abscess and the scab and the wound, as it is necessary, until he is healed.
And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses:
I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
Where small abscesses come from the head, and they are like little nests that we find in fabrics, just as a sparrow's nest is woven with threads, and there are many similar ones.
There are some fat and such that also have moisture like boils;
and if there are those which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt that the artery does not go against it.
And the works of cutting are such that you try out all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then let them make an incision above the long one.
And when the moisture is drained, then scrape off without leaving anything the skin that contains that moisture, for it comes back again if you leave anything.
then plunge cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and silk, and dress the wound, and let it be just until the next day; and those who are left of the night.
And then rebegin with cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night;
Then cure the wound of oiling as is fitting, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is not very swollen, then cut it according to this form, long-wise; and tear off the scabs, and flay it all around, and put all your care in drawing out the abscess where it lies;
and if the arteries resist you, then do as I told you afterwards.
And also do this with the abscess if it is pustular, and to cut and cure as I have told you.
And the cutting on the pustular abscess and the moist one is lighter, for they are full of blood. And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and those abscesses that I cut open on the head of an old woman;
and found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and could not break it. and if one had broken any of them, one would have made as much a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming from the head, greater than those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, let the opening be always at its most dependent place so that the pus may issue.
and treat it as is fitting.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and are many and are intertwined with one another.
And each scrofula is properly located within its own coat, like the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said. and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many.
and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and also there are evil ones who do not wish to obey health.
then look for one with good disposition to be touched, and it is similar in color to the body, quiet on each side and is not inflamed towards the neck veins nor arteries nor canal, and is not deep.
then you should scrape it above and remove the scab from each part, and if you need, take off the two lips of the scab on the nails, just as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et the wound is small and small, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor let the spatula touch or press, lest the hands escape, and do not go too far, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and what you do does not let you proceed, then put in the wound a bit of vitriol or some powder that stops bleeding, and hold back the wound. and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it.
then look at what remains as if there were no small ulcers, and cut them and clean them out.
And if it has a great vein in the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall down without harm.
Then wrap the wound in an old cotton cloth soaked in Egyptian oil, then apply treatment.
And if you cover the entire scrophule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, then there will be no remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrophule. it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and pull strongly, and sew it as we have said.
it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and pull strongly, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that have superfluity, puncture there where it becomes moist;
and puncture it in the same way as the one mentioned before, depending on the case, then apply poultices with oil and similar things, so that what is left of the corruption may corrupt. and when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
To those who have suffocated, it is necessary that the incision in the throat called "epiglote" be made. and one does not help by doing so, because all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are inflamed at the abscess in the mouth or in the throat or in two armpits.
When the disease is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cut the epiglote in order to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we wish to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut from the suture, not in the cartilage.
and this is necessary for the cutting of the epiglote because there is no flesh and the vessels are long in inquiry.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its extent, then cuts the leather so that it comes to the chin. and avoid shedding blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the suture so that we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the incision of the vein of the chin which jumps forth through the broken place and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew it all by itself without the cartilage.
then administer medicines that cause growth of flesh until he is healed.
On does not make this just so long as the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death approaches. Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four; then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maid take a knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut out part of the channels of the womb;
and I was called to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I knew that she had not cut her throat nor conducted anything except the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed her until she was sound.
and it happened to the maiden that she became hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her normal condition;
therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
This is a dislocation. It is called "hernia of the throat" and is a great abscess in the color of greenish copper, and it occurs mostly in women;
and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental;
or natural has no deceit.
And the accidental is in two ways, of which one resembles fat to us, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from an artery; and if there is fear, and it does not behoove to work with fire except in one who is small, and test and examine through all the intervening flesh: if you find it thus as I say fat, and is unable to be moved by any means, so cut it, as one cuts fat, and treat it all with its own cloth, if there is none. and examine well everything, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is healed perfectly.
We have many methods among us, which I will say all are similar;
and it is fitting that I tell all the difference that is between beginning and end.
I say that end is heat and fever remaining, until the ebullition has passed, and the corruption is completed; then restlessness of fever and heat.
With the new one there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains the pus, which are its own sacs and correspond to the color of the flesh, and begins like a jaundice, and becomes swollen;
and are according to its appearances, either fatty, or moist, and have many colors as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the nose, that you examine and inquire first through all the instrument which is called "interstice", according to what its form will be or the chapter which comes afterwards.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses is that you take a more moist place than you find within the abscess, and turn your two fingers in and out, so long as you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care that it does not jump away.
If moisture comes forth quickly, regardless of its color, then do as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes forth, know that it is hard, then do as I have said in a cross shape, and take hold of it with pinceures, and gently scrape off each part and watch the coat where it lies so you can lead out the pus without harm.
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it apart in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, then the wound comes back many times;
and if there is still a little left and the blood grieves, then apply a wound with some corroding powders, and stop the bleeding, and put hot soothing things on the abscess, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, then cut off both lips of the wound, and cure what remains with whatever flesh.
and if the vein is contrary to you or another thing that hastens and applies vinegar mixed with vinegar, and lets it be for two days or three, until the wound purifies, and let the boiling of blood settle. then come back to closing what remains of the cut.
Behold here the forms of the inner instruments, and they are of three manners: large and middle-sized and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret", one of which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, in order to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are of citrine stone, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most proven for encircling the abscesses of fistula;
and there are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the perforations.
The forms of the probes are of many likenesses, as you see here:
and if there are those who have two kinds of three types also;
and if there are those who have three kinds of third type, and are also of three ways;
and if there are those who have two kinds, and some with only one kind, and are of three types;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these is sharp, and there are some that do not cut more than from one side, for which we castrate the nerves, so that one cannot draw blood or touch the nerve.
and from these instruments are made bandages that respond in strips, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and don't use more force than in the natural joints, such as legs, arms, shoulders, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling scissors for flintstones, according to this form, by which blood is staunched; and one puts it sometimes in the location where veins and arteries are healed completely, and sometimes according to this great form;
Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and inflamed, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to boil according to this form of the line from b to g; then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine injecting flesh, then close the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
and if the nipple points downwards and is concealed because of its great size like it has in women, so cut it into two folds above, by two similar incisions; so that one is attached to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then flay the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about dressing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed or the incision is not entirely done because the patient will not rest or due to the bleeding of blood, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton in corrosive oil; and leave him so long as he wastes away the remainder and fat, then cure him until he is healed.
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulae or those with nodules, and some contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture need to be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care for it with oil suitable to this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the same kind as scrofulae, then cut it as we have said in incisions for scrofulae, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
When the arteries are blocked, and the skin above is bound together, so there often arise abscesses, and it happens just as frequently that a vein becomes inflamed and forms an abscess.
and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long in the back and front. and when you feel it at your joints, then you feel a straining.
and if it is due to the vein, then it appears as swelling.
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits, in the groin, or at the neck and many other places, and it is very large. It is then necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head also needs to avoid it, and in the one who is swollen from artery trouble do not make a cut above the long skin.
then work on the shape so it becomes one with the skin, and gently separate the artery from the threads, until it is uncovered;
then push a needle underneath the one, and make it pierce just to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two loops, according to what I have instructed you about the extraction of the two arteries that are in temples;
then insert the point that is between the two loops of an introducer until the blood flows out that is there, and loosen the abscess;
then apply the treatment as the bowstring tightens, until the bandage falls off; then treat those with ointment suitable for them, until they are healed;
and if the abscess is due to the cutting of a vein, then it is necessary that you wet with your hand all that part of the skin where the abscess is, then push a needle underneath the point you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be one double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; Then apply the aposteme, as I have told you, to one of the two parts at the two joints of the shoulder.
And if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then replace another needle on all of the thread below the entire aposteme to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
Then cut the aposteme until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the cure and leave what is attached.
Then put a damp cloth soaked in vinegar and oil on it, then administer poultices and ointments until he is healed.
Also just like abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come on the nails when they are worn out or from excessive work and similar things.
And this often happens at joints and in the shoulders and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous aposteme, and its color appears like the color of the flesh, and it occurs in many dispositions without pain.
and when one constricts it strongly, then the patient feels pain, and is not entirely in the depths of the heart, but beneath the liver;
and it is well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and he who is in joints does not consent to be cut by iron; by chance there may be contraction; and he who is in the head or on the forehead, forms the leather at the scapula.
and he who is in the head or on the forehead, forms the leather at the scapula. If the abscess is small, one should take hold of it with forceps and cut its root;
and if it is large, one should suspend it with a ligature, and scrape, then cut and reassemble the wound to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
At times it happens in bellies and not elsewhere so much, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to those things, and it has subtle roots and a big head;
and there are both small and very great ones;
and I saw a man who had two on his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and they had split open and were oozing moisture.
I copied them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of incision is such that you consider whether the patient is moist, and the color of the articular flesh is white and moist and has a subtle root; if he cuts in the spatula-like area wide, and there are cauterizations with fire present before you.
if he cuts in the spatula-like area wide, and there are cauterizations with fire present before you. For when cutting comes often too great flowing of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind it to the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the linen thread until it cuts through the artery, and let it be guided by its own work;
and if the roots are thick, then have fear not to cut it at all for the belly's sake, but you can well cut off the half, and then cauterize so that it does not revive;
then treat the wound, and be sure to cut off the thread which is of a fuzzy color and has poor sensation and little regard.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the cure of chancres later.
when the boil is full If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound or a split in the syphilitic abscess, and it is on the belly and is accompanied by some swelling, just as it happens in other ulcers, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from inflammation;
et if it is due to the rusting of the sores and by the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears through various exits. And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then it is much more diverse, and when one presses it at its base it swells up, and then returns, and by chance becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it's because of moisture, it's a light thing, and it shows well when you press it with your hand, not at all constraining.
and if it's because of blood, then it shows by these signs the abscess is large and hard, and it's fixed according to a quantity; and if it's because of windiness, then it is sensitive to the toucher, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or windiness.
and if it's because of windiness, then it is sensitive to the toucher, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or windiness. You must leave off the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his reins and be stretched out straight, then sign around the belly. Then instruct the patient to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the joint you have marked for all the surrounding tissue, then cut off the top half of the abscess to the great unguent. Then bind it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the bow be thoroughly secured.
Then work on the half of the abscess that extends over the bandage, and thrust your finger into it, and cut the intestine. If you find it caught on the bandage, then release it, and insert the intestine back into the belly.
And if you find the bowel, take hold of it at the intestine, and cut away the superfluity.
And if the artery or vein resists you, go around it gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads into them, and tie the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you made pierce.
Then strain the abscess with four leaves above the needles; and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the leaf until it can bear, and let the dead flesh perish by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and can bear, then cure with whatever is needed, and leave the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and can bear, then cure with whatever is needed, and leave the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the leaf with whatever is needed, and bind the leaf.
of the chancres We have said in the section about ulcers, and how one should work with them by medicine, and how one should avoid iron treatment.
and say that ulcers in the groin are very bad and require great care in treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are on the leg or can be removed like those in the armpits, and in the crotch, and similar places, one should remove it all at the beginning when it starts.
no one has ever healed before me.
And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purify the patient sometimes with black gall;
then make it healthy if it has evident fullness, then place the patient in good condition to do the work;
then throw out your clamps or chancre, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts leaving nothing behind;
and let the blood flow freely and press well on the place with your hand or something, and if the decoration of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cautery until the bleeding is stopped; then the doctor will treat another wound until they are healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the gathering of water is done, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure made by medicines, and that which is cured by fire.
and one should not touch with iron in these two likenesses: it is to know, tympanitis and hydropsy, for it is mortal.
then when you are using medicines for this likeness of dropsy which is called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease other than dropsy, such as diarrhea and similar things. if one should not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient with strong vigor, and he has no other disease except dropsy alone, and he is not too old nor too young, then thus you should proceed: hold the patient upright on your hands, and the attendants press the belly with water at the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spine thorn according to this form: And let it cut to two parts. to the point, and even if it is not so deep that it can reach just to the intestine when you insert it, and cannot harm it;
then look to see if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: then it is necessary that you cut on above of the third tooth, straight downwards from the lip; and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the third tooth;
and if it is due to laxity, whether to the right or not, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie over the fissure so that the superfluidities do not flow to that weak place;
then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and stop it, and lift your hand away from all the spatula-like substance between the skin and the scab just as when trimming to the quantity of an eyelash or around;
then pierce the scab until the spatula-like substance comes to a natural outlet, and that is the exit of water, then wash it thoroughly, and put this instrument away, and that is its shape; And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and it is of gold or light lead, and in the part below there is a small perforation; and on one side, three perforations; and he of another part, and one of another;
and the head is cut off like a feather, and it's the shape of the incision that writers make on a feather:
at the top is the alembic, so that when instruments come to water, they now flow on the instrument;
then drain the half or third part, because if you drain more than is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of their soul from the wound, or they may fall into a faint, or approach death;
but drain it according to the quantity of their virtue, and according to what the patient's vital signs indicate, and their pulses;
then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the reason that stops the perforation which is above the syphac, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner;
Then resume using the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of water.
Do this any day, and be careful not to wash so long as there is still but a little water.
And if you doubt the patient, and leave too much water, so that the wound or sand becomes hot, and through excessive sweating or bathing and sun exposure, and it turns into drinking; and treat with drying medications until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, on the liver, and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
No child is born who does not have a hernia in the genital area, or the hernia is small, or it is not in its place.
If he must then pierce through all the skin layers very subtly according to this form:
then put the small plug of clay under him, and tie it and keep it thus for three or four days until he wants to make urine, then remove the plug, and let him urinate, and then put it back.
and by chance there is no need for it, because the urine that comes forth does not allow it to remain closed.
That of whom the pustule is small, it is treated with a poultice of cloth, as we have said, and will expand.
Those who do not have the fistula in its place are wounded, because none are born with the fistula at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high. and they cannot flow because the material cannot come just to the margin, and that is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies often on his back, and then takes hold of the head of the penis and cuts it like the shape of a quill, so that the fistula opens in the middle, as it should.
and beware of the flowing of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and care for the wound until it is healed.
Of the pustules on the penis Many times these things come to pass in the vulva, and there is an appearance of bad flesh.
and among them are malignant ones and not.
so it is necessary that you take them with subtle medicine, and cut and clean all of them, then apply damp cotton in Egyptian ointment. then anoint with divine ointment until they are healed.
And if the boil is malignant, with foul odor and putrid color, then it is necessary that you apply a cauterization.
When you have cut it off, and the excrescence is in the vulva, and some part is within the skin and some part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the excrescence which is inside first. and when it is healed, then anoint the outside.
For when you anoint it all together, it is not at all assured that the head of the vulva will not be pierced, and there will come blackness and corruption in its own vulva and on the skin.
If it is necessary to heal all that is black and corrupted, then lay upon the plaster of honey and flour which is made from the rind of green apples and vetches, then cure with other remedies until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes from it, so apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The fire cauterizes in two dispositions together: that is to say, by the purging of blood and by corruption;
and if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you tie or guide a piece of cloth to the foreskin, and make the patient urinate in between;
and when the skin is inflamed at the head of the foreskin which has not been circumcised, either due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you cut away with a sharp instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the foreskin be released from all parts;
and if it is a great thing to divide them, then you should skin him at the spatiumile about a little below the head of the penis and scrotum;
then sever them nicely between two, and place a thin cloth of moistened linen in cold water, so that it will not stick again.
Circumcision is not the disconnection of continuity as with other wounds; although we do this work of our own will and properly with children, it is necessary that we make the best and most gentle work for their salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen that the greatest part of masters and seniors who performed circumcision were around me, by force, and all alone.
so that the skin would break because there are two layers, and by chance if you cut the one above and leave the one below. The wound recovers slowly, and there is doubled pain, and the member's tip is not assured at all.
and the abscess is cleaned by chance and escapes the iron, and the work runs, and many times it happens in this way that there is no need for cleaning and I have seen.
From the mundification which is done with force I have found the goodness of experience, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if it is cut equally in all the fingers to the same length; but that the thread be well tightened around the skin;
and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are only making him bind the thread around the rod, and then let it relax in all ways that you can.
then make it stay between your hands straight, and reapply the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments.
put your hand on the handle and blow or squeeze, and pull it up until the head of the handle is in place; then clean it well from the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place marked with a doubled thread, then tie it underneath one link and the other.
then clean it well from the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place marked with a doubled thread, then tie it underneath one link and the other. and hold it in place by the second thread at the pouch and the pointing finger, and cut between the two links, then lift the key above hastily and pull up the head of the handle. then let the blood flow little by little, because it is purging. and put powder on top and on the powder a cloth glued with a hen's egg yolk cooked without water, mixed with rose oil good and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and then treat it again as long as it is healed.
The form of the forces at the time of confluence thus is:
the two heads should be held and pressed together, and the heads should also be as large as the hands in equal measure:
the mistake at the time of confluence is when the humors inside flow during the incision;
therefore it is necessary that you spread it to your finger, so that the swelling makes an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
And if they continue for three days, and what is under the scab is swollen, then let it be until the abscess is appeased, and scrape it lightly.
and cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the scab, so that it will not harm anything.
Cure then the joint of sudden injury from powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if it is cut too much outside measure, and it goes above, so it will not harm.
Cure then, as we have said, until it is healed.
of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to stoning of the kidney, or blood congealed, or bladder, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone or knot in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bound on his knees. and let their feet be placed on the back, and stretch his belly from above the back, and bind the patient's arms as tight as he can. and then the collar of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is loosened.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "syringe", which is this form:
and it should be a fine, thin, silver thread, like the quill of a bird. and it should be the length of a palm and a half, and fine at the head.
And the manner of urination is that you take a doubled thread, and tie it at the head to a piece of linen or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe.
and remove the excess of the linen and insert it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and hen's gall, and make the patient sit on a siege, and raise the bladder and the urethra with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
Then put the syringe lightly on the vein, until it comes to the root of the vein, then fold the vein upwards towards the mouth.
Then insert the syringe almost to the bladder, and feel the patient's body come almost to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide or director of it is twisted.
Then draw out the thread slowly and slowly along all the woolly parts, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it further, and make the urine flow.
and begin the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and the patient be eased.
When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then make all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if there are three perforations: One on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the warts fall out because the medicine is such that it stops well the vein without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and insert when needed.
and when you put your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the cauterizer in the moisture, and draw on the drawing that is inside.
if you pull out the moisture to the cauterizer, and then press hard on the drawing that is inside; so the moister will go inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder:
And it is made of silver or archaust, and the head is higher up;
and below at the navel or where the bandage falls;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moister in it that you use to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pot over the fire on top of that moister.
then put the head of the catheter into the urethra, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture that happens, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a door, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do as you have done with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the section the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
and I said the difference between a pierced stone and one that has been struck by rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work with a chisel; and in the bladder, and in the urethra;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the urine jumps out of the bladder resembling water in its subtlety.
and I will advise heresy, and instruct the patient to scratch his penis, and he will do this many times, and then become inflamed. and as a result of these jumps, foundations fall away;
and the recovery of children is light until they are 4 years old, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is in middle-aged people, who are between youth and old age.
and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient through purgation, in order to draw out all the bad blood that is within the intestines. For it often hinders from seeking the stone.
Take the patient by the feet, and lean him back and move him down below, so that the heel descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from a high place.
Then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is all leaning downwards.
Then question and touch it inside;
If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut on the stone.
And if it does not yield to the touching at all, then moisten your two fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is feeble, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished. and thrust it into its foundation, and question the stone, and when you feel it with your fingers, then apply it to the neck of the bladder.
Then press above on your kneecap, and bind it to the outer side away from where you will cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out with his right hand the membranes above, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the membranes in the part where you will make the incision.
Then bind the spatula tightly, so it forms: And make a space between what is between the membranes and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the right flank.
And be straight on the stone, and your knees should be at the foundation, and the incision should be wide on the outside and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
In case the pressure is such that the knee which is at the foundation jumps away without effort;
and know that there is such a stone where there are angles, and margins: so it is grey to issue;
and if there is one that is worn out, resembling a flint, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
To this then where it has angles and margins, make the cut larger;
and if it does not jump, then it is necessary that you strain on the pincers which are also like a file at the top, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below the said instrument a subtle curved one at the top;
and if you cannot shape it thus, then enlarge the small hole and if the blood flows out, strain it with vinegar;
and if there are more than one stone, then insert the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then file it straight, and the small ones afterwards if there are several.
And if she is very large, then it must be sewn, and a greater wound made. Because two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine flows forth soon after, as the flesh cannot heal;
but nonetheless force it with a file or chisel with pincers, until you cut it into pieces;
and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and cover it with a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then rewrap the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you untie it, then rise up very well with oil and water, and then cure him with balsam of diaphaneikon and balsam of basilikeon, until he is healed.
And if hot apostemes come to the wound and ulcers, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it stays the urine which is known in this manner as not leaping with the urine: Then press your thumb into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, so will the bladder be corrupted, and it will perish.
Then wash the wound with water and vinegar and silk, and aid him in all ways that you know, until he is healed.
And it is necessary that all the works that you use to cure him, that you bind his two hips together, and assemble the medicines on the site.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra of the penis, stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out; So do as I say then, cutting it many times, or excuse cutting for this cure. I've already experienced it thus.
Take one iron fork according to this shape and let it be fixed at three angles in one handle:
Then take a thread and wrap it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come down into the bladder;
Then insert the forest (cauterizing iron) into the lighter limb, so it comes to the stone. and turn the iron back to your hand in small strokes, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
then soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the limb. So it is then broken, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then place one thread under the stone and another above, then make the limb meet the stone between the two threads, then pull it forth, and release the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound. and heal him until he is sound.
of the stone of women
Stone is often lodged in women, and when it does occur, it is a grievous cure, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second reason is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of surgery;
and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman's body is more inwardly placed than the stone in a man's body, so one must make a deeper incision and there is great fear. And if necessity demands it, then you should take a well-informed midwife, and once you find one, she will guide you, and if you cannot find one, then choose a subtle midwife;
and the present one shows a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command regarding the incision of stone; and look closely if the woman is a virgin:
and look closely if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to strengthen her dowry or foundation and seek out the stone;
and if she finds it, then she forces her to put the stone underneath her dowry, and commands her to strengthen her dowry with the patient, and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it is most manifest, and feel the stone in that part; and does not move his two (joints) above or below the stone or soot, and is the size at first small.
and does not move his two (joints) above or below the stone or soot, and is the size at first small. then bind the linen on the wound, if you feel the stone so close to the sore that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
it is to know, small and great and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those which have ridges.
know the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the blood flows, then apply a glass-like powder to it, and keep it there for an hour until the blood is stanched.
then return to your work, until the stone is further out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work.
and if the blood flows, and it's from an artery that is cut, then apply powder to the wound and tie with tents and bandels, and do not re-start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest perhaps the patient would die. Then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the place has been dressed, then return to your work until the stone is out.
Ramie's water is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white mucus that lies beneath the skin of the groin, which contains the egg.
and it is called "white spawn", and never is properly contained in the eggshell if one believes that it is another egg. and it is the skin of the groin between the white spawn that we have said.
and this does not happen unless. And the genesis of this Ramice is from weakness that comes to the scrotum, and spreads that matter.
And never if it comes from percussion on the groin, and this moisture has many colors: or it declines to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is the white spawn that we have said, then there is the abscess swelling, as long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the groin, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper wool, it seems that the abscess rejoins with part of the egg, and so one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white shin, he feels well;
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the surrounding quarters thoroughly, in order that the shape is as it was before. According to these things then that come after the introitus, judge what is inside.
And when we cure it with iron, it's necessary that the patient be cleansed according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
then apply a poultice on his back, on something slightly high, and place many cloths under him.
then sit on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the beam onto one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles;
Then take the spatula and let it lie on the skin between the long part until it reaches the nail, and make your incision straight while cutting through the skin of the scrotum just to where it becomes white, and scrape it subtly according to what is possible.
Then pierce the scrotal skin with water at the largest opening, and extract all the water, and then put in your fingers, and cover the scrotum above.
and do not touch the skin of the scrotum, but only the scrotum itself; cut it all or in small pieces yourself, as well, so subtly that it is on the other side, because if you do not cut it well, the water will come back;
and if the testicle jumps away from your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished the work on the scrotum;
then gather up the two books of keys of joints to one seam, then care for it as for other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, fearing the depletion of blood.
then set the joint back to all its suspensions, and extract the egg, and care for it as we have said.
And if the water is gathered together in two parts together, know that they are two branches; then set the other part in equal manner as you did the first, then stop the blood, and put a linen cloth moistened with rose oil into the wound.
then set the other part in equal manner as you did the first, then stop the blood, and put a linen cloth moistened with rose oil into the wound. and put another linen cloth moistened with wine and oil on it, and set the two joints together, and put a doubled napkin over them, and tie it up all around according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and employ them to be made of wool yarn according to this resemblance and let them be assembled by sewing in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the cloths takes place on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the hand.
and the other two cloths take place on both armpits, and let all be assembled in a binding at the buckle of the breech.
and at times this medicine of cauterization takes place in lieu of iron cutting, and it is that you take a subtle cauterizing knife, and cut the skin of the scrotum, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syphilis-containing water descends.
so take the cauterizer according to this form, and pierce that white syphilis-containing water once, and scrape it off with this subtle hot cauterizer.
And set the bone in all ways you can, until you have fixed everything.
and make sure that fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more safe; and beware of bleeding, and be careful with the works of cutting;
and if nothing makes you contrary, or an abscess forms or bleeding occurs or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horribleness, then persuade perforation, as I tell you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs we have said that the abscess is gone, sit the patient on a light bed. then pierce the abscess in the part below all along the spine, and make the perforation as long as the body.
and let the ulcers be large, so that all the liquid runs freely;
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining liquid flow out, then care for it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let the liquid come out in the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a pin or the instrument used to drain the water from dropsical patients, by which the swelling will be thus;
and enlarge the ulcer, and know that the liquid returns, and is assembled after six months or in as much as it was before, and when it is assembled like before, and thus will the patient spend their days.
Know that in the cutting of this reed, there is more fear than many preparations, because it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone;
and I will tell you about the work and similar things of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the body, and indeed also from the kidneys; and this is by many cases.
It is to be known through excessive acidity and biliousness, which spreads to the kidneys, or from blows;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and there is no pain at all, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance some abscesses are grievous, pale and flabby, with a dull color, and sometimes it comes from the obstruction of an artery or the swelling of a vein.
When it's due to the obstruction of an artery, then it is known by the hot appearance of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove you to touch there.
He who is skilled in the art of bleeding from a vein is known by his ability to express the pulse at the wrist, and can well perform the incision according to this likeness, and on other animals. and it is that you should cut open the shell of the egg, then lift it up and take out the yolk from above, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the yolk.
If the egg is already softened with those juices, then it behooves you to take out the yolk and cut open.
and if it is in the sac or in what is inside the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver all that tension and cut open again.
And if the birth of the scar is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut away all of it and extract the yolk, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then dress the wound with damp linen in rose oil and wine, and then care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess enveloped in a wrapping similar to a fig leaf, with the softening of the shell, and the patient becomes grievously ill when he goes.
and the treatment of this disease is equally frightening as the one before, and yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory device of the testicles down to your knees, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and take hold of them, and stretch them firmly.
Then cut the spatula-like instrument sharply wide on either side of the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert an awl where there is the doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come forth, and then tie it again at the other end. Then straighten out the skull in mid-division, according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound as with others that are torn open, so that no vessel bleeds which nourishes one of the testicles.
for in this case there is no harm coming from it, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to draw out the testicles from all the vessels. so that the ears do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they shrivel up and cannot be helped.
The events of this remedy are by the section that comes from the hernia or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, therefore the intestines descend into that hernia to one of the testicles.
and this hernia is either from the hernia or from the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes.
or by percussion, or by leap, or by braying, or by lifting a heavy burden, and through similar things;
and the signs when it is of the extension due to syphilis, so it has poco and poco, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the very bottom, because syphilis presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the scurf, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse appearing abscesses below the skin near, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body flowing out of the scurf.
And at no time do the loops go down with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great suffering to the patient, especially when he is pressed.
And in these iron cures there is fear, why it must be avoided.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put their hand inside the wound and into the intestines if they can fit. then press down on his neck between your hands, and lift up the ribs;
then stretch the skin above, and cut away all the skin of the scrotum long. then put in the leaves of the size and shape that you need to open the wound, so that the eye may come out.
then scrape off the white scurf that is below the skin of the testicles, until the white scurf is completely removed from all sides.
then press your thumb into the crease where the testicle is located, between the white scurf that is below the skin of the testicle and between the second scurf, and from behind the testicle, and between the second scurf.
and then push with your right hand into the fold of the testicles, and lift the white scurf up to your left hand, and raise the testicle to all the scurf towards the waist. and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle up high, and release what is behind the tie;
and ask your hands if there is any point of the intestine enveloped or wrapped around the white scurf, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly underneath.
Then take a needle where it has the thick thread made of ten threads, and bind it to the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the size, then cut the threads that appear from sons, as long as there are four threads; then tie them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and bind the scrotum, which we have said is under the skin of the testicles, with a very strong cord of two parts; then wrap the threads of sons around them, and tie them together with two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter there, lest a suppurating abscess does not come to be; and put the cord above that according to the first cord long two fingers of its length, and after these two cords leave the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles a finger's width; and after all other things according to the roundness that the egg bears;
then cut in the part that is below the skin of the testicles, until the blood flows and the bowels move, as we have said before.
then apply wet wool in oil to wounds, and place on injuries, and apply the bandage that we have said. And any time the white sacrum bone is cauterized as we said, after incision, due to fear of excessive bleeding. For this often happens, and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself;
and if it does not fall off, then use hot water and apply to what we have said, until it falls off.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is healed perfectly.
of fleshly hernia
In this case I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment by iron.
And the ancient ones say that it is made like the tendril that surrounds the liver, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting above and gently below.
then strike me middle, and heal the abscess of those who work, until the servants die;
and heal it as we have said, until he is healed.
Once in a while comes gangrene in the fingers, as we have said, and opens up the flesh;
and do not remove any of the intestines from the abdomen, and if some come out, it is little, and repair them every hour;
and anyway if he stays too long in this position, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestines come out;
and this happens through the extension of the abscess which is on the fingers, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swelled the flesh and opened up;
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is cured by fire in this way: and it is that the patient lies thus on his back between your hands, then shape the lump of swollen flesh to its natural size according to the quantity of three fingers.
and then draw out the skin that is under the blister that follows, and take the red part and place it on top of the apparent flesh of the blister.
and press it to the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent blisters of the skin on top of the red part, and cut one and the other.
then draw out the top of the red part, and do not cut or stretch anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the hiccups of the intestines. then treat it by treating wounds.
then treat it by treating wounds. And when you dress the wounds, sooth and cure the sore, until it is healed.
The sacrum is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the coccyx
Many times the skin of the scrotum is softened in some men, because the things that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
and it is necessary when one wants to heal him that you make the patient lie down on his back and loosen the skin that is softened over natural skin;
then bring together the two lips at a seam, and if you see fit, sew up the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly;
then loosen between the seams and cover it as you would other wounds, until he is healed, and let the thread fall away.
of punishment
Know that castration is esteemed in our law, and for this reason it would please me that I not speak of it at all in this book;
and it is necessary only by two means:
one of which is that the mirror responds in a healthy manner when one asks him about his health and about the treatment;
and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cattle and other beasts.
I say then that castration is done in two manners: or by traction, or by incision.
In that which we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and relaxed. then take them with your hand, until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them.
Of castration by size: it is necessary that you bind the beast and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle one stroke, when you have well circumcised them.
and leave no part of the scrotum or the thin scrotal sac that is above the vas deferens;
and this manner of castration is more sure than that which is done by traction, because in the traction something may remain of the testicles by chance, whereby the beast desires lust.
Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermafrodite is according to two manners in men: one being that between the two testicles it opens like the shape of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes in court his urine.
And the other manner is in women, and has above the elbow as a penis and two testicles.
And the care for men and women is that you cover all the sores together, and care for them just as other wounds;
in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no care.
Tentigo is a sore located on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it just as large as a hand, and that's the cure.
You should dye the excess of the tentigo on your hand or on nails, and cover it lightly;
and do not go too deep into it, lest bleeding ensues, then treat with another treatment until they are healed.
and at another sign that appears on the lips of the mouth, and the swelling, and by chance jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason the ancient people called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the incision, and cure until it is healed.
it is erroneous when the woman's natural state is not perceived, or the pustule is small; and it is a natural occurrence by birth, or an accident caused by disease that has come into being;
and it is a natural occurrence by birth, or an accident caused by disease that has come into being; or it is due to a festering sore, or subtle or sharp abscess, and it occurs in the mouth, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
and hinders conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers of having children;
and the knowledge of this is by the observation of the bale.
If the swelling appears close to appearing, it is at your breasts or in the armpit.
If it is a boil that is subtle and it is close to two books, then hasten and read thus:
put your two index fingers together, and the woman be on her back, spread her legs;
then place the two books firmly, until the subtle boil is resolved, and cover it with poultices;
then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the boil, and place the woman at home each day, so that she cannot coagulate.
And if the abscess is hard and thick, so it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the poultice is of new charcoal, then suspend it on a hook and cut it;
and have the blood-stopping medicines, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and aloeswood, together with abundant egg white;
Then provide a strap of linen wide enough so that the wound cannot heal.
and thus be long, and provide a cloth of dry linen;
then be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
And when in the marshes there comes flesh born, so it is necessary to cut it according to this manner, unless it be enchanted abscesses. For the enchanted abscess in the marsh, one must not touch with fire.
Of hemorrhoids Varices are openings of veins that are not accustomed to being cut, and when varices are old they become hardened.
and we have said in the division the likenesses of them, and the signs, and I will say now those that receive cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply seated in the anus, and do not sense pain, are not cured by iron.
Those who are at the entrance of the anus, where one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Then it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then take away the swelling with tweezers, and chop off its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
then bind her feet with a bandage for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et if bleeding occurs from it comes let the poultice sit on a decoction of sumac and orange peel and galls and similar things then take barley flour and mix with honey and oil and make an application on his back.
And if he stays still, it's good. If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breast so they don't cause pain.
then take linen, moisten it in plantain juice or agrimony juice with old wine, and apply to the place.
And when the abscess has healed, then treat the joint with ointment until it is sound.
and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles the gouty joint, so it must be covered as I said earlier. and then treat it until it is sound.
Many kinds of abscesses come to the marriage, such as chancre and bony abscess and herpes and boils and blisters and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
It is necessary then that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not one of the abscesses that cools down.
and if you wish to know the work of iron, then observe whether the abscess is angry at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red so that you can see it. Then don't hurry to puncture, but let it cool down until the pain is appeased.
and then have the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or he reclines, and lean back on his back and bring his feet to the opposite side of the leg.
and let his hips be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good cord.
Then the ball goes towards the right side, and one brings in the instrument with which one works at the mouth of the mare's, from which the form comes.
and it is necessary that when you bring in this instrument, you make the first mark on it so as to know the depth of the mare's, so that what enters into the instrument does not go too far and does not hurt the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the mare's with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause her distress.
and it is necessary that he puts the bell of the instrument above and holds the instrument.
And when the abscess opens and one does it gently with the hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the top, at the spatula-like place.
and when the bowstring is empty, so it is necessary that you put damp linen cloths soaked in rose oil or green oil in the wound;
and place the cloth far from the wound at the bottom of the bed, and place it above the bed and on the clean linen cloth moistened in water or mulberry leaves that are cooked;
then the patient after two days of dressing, according to this, until they are healed;
and at any time lift the bed and the wound by rinsing with water and honey, and then with water or lily roots and aloe long cooked; then return to dressing.
And if the wound is covered with a marsh, then it is necessary to take care not to cook anything made of iron, but rather care for it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth It is necessary first at the bedside that she knows the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman go down below, and desire to give birth.
Then the child hastens to come out quickly; Then you know that this childhood is according to natural form, and the exit is under its head, and the second one with it;
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on his belly, so that the child comes out quickly;
for when he descends above his head, the afterbirth comes with him, and the mother is rid of her excesses through good purging;
and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes on his feet, and comes forth from the body or from the head, or hands, or comes above his belly, or in some other way, and is turned by chance around his neck, and through other bad forms;
so it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms how one should help him.
If the child comes onto its head by natural birth, and the mother gives birth with difficulty, and the baby's strength is weak, then make it sit on a stool or have women hold it.
And let the baby's natural excretion of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour it between its navel and the little space that is the form. and cut the scab, and scrape off the nail as much as the moistors that are in the wound can do it.
and paint the woman's belly as long as the baby descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek mixture with sesame oil.
then make her take a condiment and sternutate, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour. if it stays now the baby.
And if the two hands are far apart, you must pull them together gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, then the woman sits on the seat and lifts up her feet high; then put the stool on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not stumble while standing up;
and if the hands cannot enter and the child is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that was placed here before, extract the child, and pull them together evenly.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes onto its feet, you should support it upwards; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
then take the foot and stretch it little by little.
When it jumps up to the hips, then command it to bend, and make it stretch again with condiments; if it jumps away, may God will.
And if it is not further than we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape. For then it will be easier.
And if it doesn't come away as we have said, take myrrh of aloes, and oil of sassafras, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman inside and pour this unguent down to her navel, then make her sit in cold water down to below the ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, make a poultice of myrrh and put it underneath and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her walk and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is now jumping.
From the exit of the child from its knees When the child comes in this form, I put the bail of its hands pinch by pinch; Then be mindful of his neck, and let his feet hang down below, and let him rest on the bed. and fold his hands little by little, and then take hold of his hands on the belly, and remove the pillows underneath, until it is arranged below. and if the infant does not jump, then take his feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in. and stroke the child gently. and instruct the woman to take hold until the infant comes out.
From the exit of the child that comes out with one hand hanging down It is necessary to contrive how to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and take off her legs well.
then administer the musculage that I have recounted;
and if she does not abort, then make her sit on the siege, then study how to bring back the hand; and shape it according to natural form, and make her stretch out, and command her to take hold until the child comes forth.
From the exit of the child from its neck, and having spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. it is necessary that the midwife holds onto her hand, then turns it back and forth, and gently guides;
and when it is even, then put on the natural musculage of oil and aloes, as we have said, then command her to move back and forth;
and when you have done this, then make her sit on the siege, and command her to take hold; and make her stretch out. in the same manner for all the intestines
in the same manner for all the intestines When it comes forth in this manner to the entire second stage, then cut the afterbirth with your finger, until the fluids are emptied;
and if the child bites its face and neck, then cut off the lips so they are not retained, and kill the child.
then wrap the child in it until you have put it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take care of herself sometimes:
From the exit of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes four at once; and this is not a strange thing, it often happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live unless one can name them;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live unless one can name them; I know that they multiply, and are torn apart by the womb which devours them, which is bound to the lips;
and sometimes they come out naturally as one would expect, as we have said.
And if they are bruised, then do the treatment as we have said, and the doctor should be skillful, and make soon and lightly what he makes; and do so that it may be for the salvation of the patient. Of multiple children
Certain times are formed in the months I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even up to XV, and they are all shaped like an infant by the measurement of sage glory; and it is necessary that the doctor knows everything, because by chance similar things happen to him. and do as is fitting.
Of the dead child
When you treat the woman after a dead or stillborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to do manual work; so that you know whether the woman is of good virtue, and has no accident or fears death;
It is necessary that the woman sits upright on her back, and has her knees inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the midwife should apply a poultice to the woman's back in two parts, or she be bound to bed so that she is not troubled by the descent of the child;
then smear the mouth of the mare with moist oils mixed with alti and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the bail's hands with these oils and these mixtures;
then put them in the mare lightly, then take up or down as she puts on or off what is suitable to those things, and be careful if the child appears prepared to descend onto its head;
if the cord presents in her eyes or in her neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then take hold or pinch it and adjust the sides accordingly;
et covient qu'il tiengne l'oncine  sa main dextre, et mette la corbeure entre ses doigts de la sinestre main, et le boute  tout sa main lgerement, et fich l'oncine en aucun de ces lieux que nous avons dit, tant qu'il vienne  la chose vide;
then place it opposite another tool, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions be equal;
and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, so that the tools fit together, and the tool's teeth hold them in place, as is its form:
And if there remains a part, then oil the nail of some of its fingers with oil, and grease that part, and draw out the other part;
and if there's no more of it, so put this cone or higher up, and do it until he gets out all the way.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and he cannot bring it back due to constriction, so you should wrap it on top with a cloth until it all comes out. then bind at the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in the exit, or it has a sharp point assembled, so you should put the spatula-shaped spine between your thighs, and make the head and extract the liquid. or you shape it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus likewise makes itself naturally great of head.
and then pull the bones with pincers, and if the head jumps out and it is held by the forceps, so that it is split, until the moisture which is in the wound is pulled out.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces to whatever extent you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture runs.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the mother is gentle.
And if it is strained in the belly or chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand. and make an incision in the belly or chest until the moisture which is there runs out.
and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, then thrust your hand into the depth of the wound, and pull it up to the mouth of the wound. then I apply one needle or two, and train him/her;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed because of an abscess that has come, then it is not necessary to work at all, but rather it is necessary to apply moist and greasy things; and the applier applies ointments, and such things in water that are softening and moistening.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it equal, then apply what we have said to a living child;
and if one cannot do that, then train him/her by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.
And when you have done this, if the applier applies what we have said to abscesses that come in the wound;
and if bleeding comes from the wound, then it should be put in restraining water, and the applier should apply other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose child in her womb had been dead, then she consulted another on top of it, and refused the dead one. After a long time, an abscess came forth in her mouth and swelled so much that it burst open, and caused great turmoil.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after a few days another one. I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I sought the wound and treated it with many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman stayed like that for a long time, and thereupon a little pus came from it.
and I do not remember this chapter except for the reason that, when a master finds a strange thing, he should know how to help it.
Thereafter comes the form of the pressor, by which we use books;
and at two turns to the two joints of the two ligaments. However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the beam should be one foot and a half in width, and the edge of the trees, one palm and a half long. and between the two ligaments there should be two gashes of the same beam, which are tight in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
and these two joints are fitted together in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, resembling it in subtlety and lightness, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers; and have two joints, just like you see, one palm in length and two digits in width;
and when you see to open the mare entirely with all the instrument, make the woman sit on it, her feet pendant and legs outstretched, then put the two joints together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just like you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mare, until it does what she wants.
These instruments are all topped, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the mirrors are prepared, then the work is done more quickly, and it is more suitable for people according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary to instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then have her exhale slowly, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; and if she struggles for that reason, well it is.
If not, then I take a pot and make a perforation or covering, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, casaline and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, being cooked or put in water above the fire;
Then put a cord or pipe of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mother, and tie it so that the fumes come inside the mother;
Then let her vomit, as we have said. If the secondine starts to move quickly.
And if she remains after this treatment and is not well, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or with muskadel from elderberry, and then pour it into her natural place, and make her rinse again. and when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it slowly and steadily so that the mother does not resist the extraction;
but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; so it will come out and be dislodged.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have said the remedy for vomiting, and fumigation with herbs;
and if she is not from all that we have said, so guard that you do not stray away.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marriage, you bind to the woman's hip, then anoint her with four-drug ointment. so she will recover and be put back together, and will come forth.
but nonetheless, when she recovers thus comes forth a bad smell from the stomach and head, and harms the patient. So it is necessary to make suitable fumigations for this:
none of the ancients have tried fumigation with cabbage and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
And it looks like a chain, and you put the headpiece subtle in its natural state, and the large nails above the fire;
and make the fumigations above the coals, and let the itching continue until it is worn out, and begin another.
Some children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by subtle osseous fibers. So then it is necessary for the needle to pierce that osseous fiber at its proper point, and not to penetrate excessively deep, and to guard the location so it does not touch.
Then put on a moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then an ointment treatment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not close, then put in a perforation a piece of cloth, and leave it for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to chambers.
And sometimes this stoppage occurs suddenly from a wound or abscess; So then it is necessary to cover that stoppage: So he is cured, as we have said about the caustic.
Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger than those that come from above the foundation or in the space between two parts, whether one or more fistulas.
and when that swelling is old, it works, and with added moisture becomes white or subtle bluish, and sometimes these boils burst;
and are followed by what comes out or is ejected through urine or flatulence when the patient has bowel movement, and sometimes jumps up accidentally.
And if the boils burst just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and reach just to the junction of the hip, and just to nothing of the knee.
And thus one knows the boil bursts at the fundament, and does not burst: and it is that you thrust your index finger or fundament, and thrust a thin needle of iron or steel into the boil when there is no twistiness.
And if it has twistiness, then you thrust a thin linen cloth or a horsehair into the boil as far as you can feel the cloth or hair with your finger;
and if you don't feel it, and it doesn't come with defecation or vomiting or fever, as we have said: know that it does not break through; if you hasten to heal.
And when the fistula persists just to the bladder or just to the urethral conduit of urine, then the urine jumps out and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced just to the joint of the hip, then the tendons come up to the place; if there is no twisting and the origin of the pain around it, then it is that he goes away slowly, and it is not worth medicine nor soothing by anointing;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with it.
In one that is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have tried, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and the patient lifts his legs down to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then pitch a tent of earth, or of cloth if there is twistiness, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around his foundation, then you should put your two fingers there, and if he senses then that the tent has pierced.
and when it is discovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh or skin, then know that it is pierced. if one does not intervene there, one cannot heal it.
One says however that some can be healed, but this is rare;
and the aid one gives there is to cauterize the ulcer subtlety according to the width of the abscess, as was said before. and warm the poultice thoroughly in the fistula, until it reaches the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that these burnt remnants are like a bird's feather;
and then treat with moist tents in butter, until the burnt remnants issue forth, and then treat with ointment, binding and sealing.
If he is thus healed, it is well.
If that, in no other way, cannot be healed;
and if the tent is inserted and does not penetrate all the way to the docket which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of char or pus between your shoulder and the tent, and you see the fistula opening up where the covering meets the flesh; so scrape off the beginning of the fistula and insert it before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent; and will be freed the tent, and falls;
then remove those charred hairs that appear like a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
And if the blood swells up and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
For the fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the burning away of these charred hairs, and the stopping of blood and the drying up of moisture;
then treat damp tents with butter or crushed charcoal, until the wound drips pus, and issue forth the burned hairs in the pus;
then treat the wound of scabby flesh that forms hard scales, and are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes right through to the fundament and is distant from the body, then place your thumb or fundament on it and investigate this.
If you feel the tent and between two is the flesh or the scab or char, when it is close to piercing, unless there are fires that go by way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways:
You cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it down to the bone, or if you can, place tents and care for it as before.
And don't go too far in depth, lest you cut the dwelling that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come forth without intention. Then care for it, as we have said;
Then care for it, as we have said; By chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and then wash it since it has been cut beneath the foundation, or by tent or other appointed instrument. Then cleanse that foul flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation:
Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And no fistulas are formed in this way: and it is when you set up the tent in the abscess, and it is on the outside of the foundation beneath the skin above, so take a piece of cloth with a perforation at the top according to this form: And I wrap one thread twisted in two, and wrap the poultice all around the thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is pierced on the edge of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that perforation, so that you set up your tent or foundation.
and draw the top of the thread, and tie the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
and hold it so that the thread cuts through the flesh between the two, and discharges.
then heal the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, then make it perforate in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep. For it does not behoove to cut open too deeply in the first instance, and then heal, as we have said, until he is healed.
The shape of the spatula-like spine that one makes for the abscess is much rougher on one side and cut away. and on the other hand no, because one does not strike what one must not strike, as you see here:
Wounds are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, like a kernel of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short time blood flows, and there is one or more, and they go below the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
but those that are below have little moisture, and in short time or a little of yellowish water or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation is that you instruct the patient to sit down in a chamber until the foundations come forth, and then the sons appear; if you hurry, and pinch it with pincers, or hold it to your nail, then strike at its roots;
and if the ligaments cannot hold them due to their moisture, so they take to drapery, or to cloth, or to a piece of camlet; and extract them to your hands, then cut, and powder with some hot powders that are in place of a cauterizer; or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot come out, so you purge the patient with a biting and harsh purgative to clean what is in the foundation, so that it may come out openly; if the patient takes offense, and if the thread is too far from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
if the patient takes offense, and if the thread is too far from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and that you grasp them with your finger or with forceps, and cut, then cure as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he does not fear the incision by iron. You must bring together the stitching according to this manner:
You must bring together the stitching according to this manner: Take a twisted thread, and put it into an awl, then draw the thread above and make the awl pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the awl, so that they be of equal width.
and strain the thread tightly, then knot the thread, and pull out the awl, and do so with all the others, and let only a small amount of excess blood remain.
then put on the foundation a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or cerot, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let him be until he has voided, and when they are done, treat him with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
of the burning of the skin or foundation Many times happens burning of the skin in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the patient is old and medicine is of no use. You must reset to the tip of a spatula or your fingernail's skin above, which does not let it get moist. Then cure it until it is solid as it is necessary;
and if it cannot dry, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until it heals slowly and is scraped off; Then cure it until it is healed.
of the tremble Fomice is a small appearance of an abscess near the body, and goes very deep inside;
and sometimes it bursts and becomes frosty, and one feels it just like a dead feeling of numbness, and spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is to take a cord made of goose quill or strong oxen hair, and put that cord on the numbness, until the circles purple the numbness entirely. Then turn your hand to all the cordage until you coil it all around the trembling part, and put it in deep, and shake out the trembling from its roots.
And if you see, then make it of a needle or iron according to this form, and be subtle underneath and drawing above. Do not pierce, but rather hold steady at two [points], and press.
And if you see, then cauterize the trembling part, just as it is shown in the chapter on cauterization.
One never makes a poultice of silver or archwood, or of melted or powdered tin;
and one never makes any of these small and great instruments according to the manner in which they are prepared. Those then which are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Those then which are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small. The form of the enema, whether small or great, is as follows: the belly is tied in this manner:
and if there is a deviation or the bowels are bound, as you see, and the head inside is pierced;
and has two holes on one side and one on the other.
et be the belly where one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small holes, and have between each hole as much space as I should deserve, then put into these holes a strong thread of green silk twisted in X or in a circle, and tie up the belly so that it is like a goat. and when the medicine is inside, bind it with the instrument before with a strong thread, then purge.
and this is the form of a circle:
and be the medicine not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purge with oil or almond oil or egg yolk or similar thing, then put it in slightly. then press the ministers with both hands together until it is all empty, then pull out the purge, and lift up the patient's legs to the sky, and if the medicine wants to come out, so tighten it as much as it can. and if he sleeps a whole night, then there is greater help.
And if you enema him in the illness of belly decoration, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, then the fistula is as subtle as for an infant.
and that is the form of the fistula which constrains the skin.
We have said in the division, the treatment of wounds;
and we will tell you the remedies by hand and by medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the places or locations where the wounds are made, and according to how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, cutting with sword and knife or lance or club or arrow or similar things;
or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or back, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder comes in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, so be careful if it's from stone or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is great, and you lightly doubt hot apostema. so make it heal quickly from the head itself if the wound comes forth with blood from the injury, and let the healing be contrary to the damaged part.
and instruct the patient to be full of wine and thick meats.
And if it doesn't want to heal, then make his meat less, and don't let him drink wine, nor eat flesh.
and put on the wound if there comes a hot apostema, a moist cloth in rose oil alone, or in wine stiptic.
and if there is no abscess hot, so he sets on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air or powder that I will say a little more later.
and if the fire has moved it, so he sets on some unguents, until it is cleansed.
And if the wound is great, such as a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot come together by stitches, then bring them together with stitching, just as I will say about belly wounds, by stitching.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and bleeds, and holds only by a small bit, then he should cut it off. then he should treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
And if you find putrid flesh and it is not attached to the bone, then cut off all the putrid part, and pour away the pus, then treat it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be stopped by medications, then let the artery bleed, and if you find it severed, tie it with a thread. and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put this powder which unites as soon as the ashes have cooled.
And the manner of the powder is: take half a part; dragon's blood two parts; take three parts of gall and mix it subtly, apply the wound and bind it firmly until it is well healed and joins with all its blood.
and then tie it well, and let it be without unwrapping, unless it swells; because medicine is not abandoned until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with live coal only, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but the air has disturbed the wound.
And if the burn has changed the wound, even though it seems to be the same, do not put this powder on.
but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it runs clear. then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps.
and I will tell you afterwards about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there being no difference between that and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the navel, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything constricting on it, for it harms the navel and causes it to retract. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the navel is cold and its continuance with it is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let the medicine be thus mixed, as if chalz were washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and also washed the chalz in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist anointings.
And if the wound is great, then cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is cut and full of pus, then pierce or make a deeper incision.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes forth, then close it, tie it, and cauterize as necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is blocked, by which the flesh flows, then cut the gullet on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then restrain it properly, and let it be for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so it seeks. and if there are pieces of bone, so treat them all as well as you can and those that you cannot, leave until the wound has healed, and let the opening be closed up.
and if the wound is fresh, so powder it with the powder I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, so examine whether there are signs of fever in the patient's pulse. know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh to all its blood, so do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it at all for the blood that does not stay deep, but revives to the heart, and kills the patient. but I mix an attractive ointment, and apply it twice a day.
and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more. if it doesn't come to vomiting, nor evil trembling of the heart nor excessive sweating from fever. and when you see good conditions, then know that the wound is saved. then cure it with tents and other remedies, until he is healed.
and if she cannot heal, nor work, then know that there is a fistula.
if you must do the cure as it should be done. And if the wound is from a cut or slash of a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse on the back, then treat what is in front. If she is great, of sewing;
And if she is small, of powder; and if she is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then one should cover the wound, and apply fires to those that are severed; and if they are not severed, then let the wound remain to putrefy, so that it will ease the extractions;
and of other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and middle-sized and small;
from the great wound sometimes an intestine or a membrane of the intestines is torn, whereby their introduction is hindered;
and the sewing is more troublesome, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one, therefore it is better to put in stitches gradually rather than all at once.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu'il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus  poinnes, et pour ceu vaut mieux les mouvoir li moieinne plaie, pour ceu c'on ramoine mues l'intestine  son lieu que aux autres II.
And you should know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common wounds happen in the wound of the belly, and the wound of other body wounds and two other proper wounds are common to other wounds;
and although they are more proper with the wound of the belly, I will say one by one and declare each one.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has come out, and a gentle thing is to be done, it is by one of the two manners: because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are inflamed due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this way: soak a sponge or cloth in hot water only, or cook one in boiling water with cypress and spikenard, and apply it to the intestines until the inflammation is removed.
and at times make a wine restraining, and is good that has only one purpose to deflate.
And when you see the inflammation departing, then moisten the intestine with water or have it cooked with mullein and marshmallow, for by this is the entrance freed of almost all obstruction.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for cutting off hemorrhoids;
and the first remedy is to put a bandage on as one would on a wound, so that no one should cut there unless there is great necessity.
and this is the instrument for breaking:
if it cuts deep into the curvature and does not pass through, and you see where the shape is: And when the wound is expanded, and the intestines jump forth, then set it right again according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, for this is good.
When the wound is wide and it is on the part below the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is on the part below the belly, then put the head and breast higher than the parts below, and also when there is an ulcer of the belly in one of the two parts, put your intention so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in great wounds and injuries.
Put what appears small on the wound, then have in your hands the miserable minister who holds all the rags at his hand, and gather the lips.
and that is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound some space, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread. and pierce the two keys of leather with the two keys of siphac, which is underneath the leather inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two heads of siphac together fourfold.
then strain with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then gather the two edges of the wound properly, and then leave some space, and insert another needle.
then tie the thread of the string just as you made the first needle, and do not stop making needles according to what you need them for until all wounds are restrained.
and let the needles be moderate, between fine and thick, for the fine needles pierce through all flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well. therefore it is necessary that they be moderate;
and it does not behoove to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and work the wound before the healing;
and then cut off the ends of the needles, lest they disturb the patient while sleeping, and put threads or cloths on the ends of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them like that until the wound is healed.
and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one or two needles.
The second suture is common, and it is that you join the two buttons of leather and the two buttons of skin together with a needle where there is one strong thread in between;
and when you have pierced these buttons all four together, then withdraw the needle from the part where you began, in the manner that one sews cloth;
and put a space between each suture the thickness of a minor denier;
this suture is good for men, and I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm long, and the intestines were two palms long, and the wound was inside the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was closed in just 15 days, and I cared for it, and it healed.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where one could not find any, nor any medicine; and put gauze on top of the wound two times a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
take the needle and sew it from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the corner in a straight line, then take the end of the thread or suture and pass it through to the other side of the inner part up to the outer part.
and the understanding of this suture is that you should sew as the furrier makes pelts, and that you leave once the thread on one side and pick it up again on the other, until the suture is completely finished.
The second manner of suture, which Galen says is proper, is such that some people do who assemble the two parts together naturally, and tie one end of the thread to another end in this way:
Pierce an arrow or the tip of a needle nearby, and make it pierce only that point, and leave the two joints of the skin. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part up to that point inside, through the two joints of the skin.
Then make it pierce one and then the other from the outer part up to that point inside, in two other joints of the skin that are on the opposite side.
And this is the most natural way of stitching and the most common one.
Galens says this same thing, and many testify to it, so one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather.
and knows that when the rupture is within the belly, so is the cutting more grievous than at other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and if the burn has changed it, then restore the intestines, and the cloth;
then put powder on top of raw flesh, and if the burn has changed it, then put on any salve that is available, until the wound closes; and sew the thread, and join the stitches, and the threads; then heal the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it starts to close, old cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
You don't need any other medicine for many injuries when the wounds are simple.
And if you doubt that the wound does not cause community with the main members, it is necessary to apply a small amount of linden oil at warm temperature, or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and below the shoulders.
And if he feels pain or purging in the bowels, and it happens many times, then purge with black wine tea, and similarly if the purging comes just to the intestine.
and let it penetrate inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the plantiness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to its nature from the nerves.
And if the hernia jumps from the wound, then put it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and becomes green or black, then you must tie the part that is black, so that blood does not flow there, because there are veins and arteries.
Then tie up what is between the ligament, and place the two bones hanging from the part below the wound until it reaches the end to ease extraction when the splints fall, and the wound is bound.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some people, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly with a spear.
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was diarrhea and flatulence.
I treated him accordingly as I could, and did not cease to refine the treatment until he was healed, and the abscess closed.
And when I saw it close, I feared that the patient had a bad thing in his belly. and there was no harm, but he remained in better condition, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters say that when one has a small wound in the intestine, he should be tied in such a way: take fresh from great stones, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the plaster has opened the mouth, so put it on the two lips, so that it stretches its mouth up.
and then bind the head, and it will stay so that he cannot undo it, then put another plaster after in that manner as before, until the wound is completely covered. and bandage the wound.
If the thread is applied to the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is made from an animal's intestine, in such a way:
take the end of this thread of intestine that is well separated, and then tie at the end of this thread a thin linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and bind the intestine, and pull it back into its place.
and this manner of sewing of flesh is not far from according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no reason or health, except subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it breaks open and runs down.
And a fistula is according to the greenish nodulation, hard and white, or where one does not feel pain, and it is also shorn like the feathers of a bird.
and sometimes in clear bowel, and at other times thick. sometimes thin, and at other times sufficient;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, except it is through one of the nine causes: that is to say, by the littleness of blood or body; because of his wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside and above the lips, which does not allow for new flesh to grow. because there is too much fat. or the skin is rotten and the matter is of poor quality. or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region delays digestion, and delays health, and flows by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in every member of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the sinew, or from the intestine, or from the bladder, or from some of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to the property of the main member, and similar places.
And all the abscesses that are in this manner are of severe healing, and there is nothing but hard work, and lack of understanding;
and if there is any abscess that does not come just to the place I said, and you have faith in the cure, and you recognize it, take a tent of earth or iron, if the abscess is straight, then dig.
and if the abscess is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of lead, because the lead bends and wraps around the twistiness.
and if the abscess has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the openings, because the moisture is so short from one opening to another, and it purifies.
then proceed with bleeding according to your skill, knowing if there is bone or nerve; and take note of the depth; and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press on his arm with your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the false humors and corrupted matter that are inside.
and then continue the treatment until it is healed, and if the fistula is well-filled with right matter, then it is necessary that you cut deep, as far as you can, then insert moist compresses in medicine aloe, and bind them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine may corrode the superfluity that remains at the bottom.
and then you apply poultices to the healthy skin, until it is healed;
and if it's not healed by that, then you cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the abscess, then you excise.
If vein or nerve does not grieve or main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then you scrape it away until all the corruption is removed, then treat with poultices on the healthy skin until it is healed;
and if it's not healed and returns to its previous state as before, know that you are not yet at the end;
so uncover and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then set it back in its place;
and if it's thus healed, that's good. If this is not so, know that the corruption is too deep inside, that you cannot come there. if there is no other remedy except from the natural course of things;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can draw it out with forceps, then draw it out with an instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, then pull all of them out, without leaving even one;
and if the moisture makes it difficult for you, and there is no error or fear, then cut through the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound a poultice causing putridity, and leave it until the pus has formed around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily.
and if it is a large bone, such as one from the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackened flesh is gone, then restore the wound.
and if there is a great part of corruption in it, and comes just to the marrow of the bone; so it should be washed and covered all the way to the corruption, and then it should be cured until it is bound together;
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to a reason that came from within the body, so that the matter came out at the leg and became swollen with a big abscess, and there was no other way but to open it;
but the doctor, through their foolishness, overlapped so much that the abscess opened, and a lot of matter flowed out, and became a fistula, and there came a lot of pus that all poured down and moisture from the body;
and many doctors had taken care of him for two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands, until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed through the pores to great profit. and became red the body of the youth, and had a citron color.
I pitched a tent in one of those tubules, and then searched all the tubules, and found that some were coming together in front of each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the pores as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside.
I removed what appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for that which I had removed.
and began to restore the wound with medicines over a long time, and could not heal.
and then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then removed it, and thought to close the place. But I couldn't bear to touch it except around a palm of bone, and the wound went all the way to its marrow, then I restored it with medications. and he was healed and sound quickly, and it did not require further work except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure, and because of my fear of his death. Because of the blood evacuation it often happened that one was healed completely, and in place of the bone a hard flesh arose, and it had good disposition and caused no harm or opposition whatsoever, neither when going up nor when coming down.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be set thus: take a linen and strain it to the open end of the bone, and have someone stretch it upwards; and put another linen strip, a bit thicker than the first one, and tie it on top of the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch it upwards, so that you pull away the rotten flesh below, and uncover the flesh above where you want to set the bone, so that the bone does not harm the flesh.
and place a hot iron or a heated tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
and it is necessary to clean as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to clean again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh.
then place a hot iron underneath, and then clean out the corruption from one part to another, and be sure to clean up as much of the long side of the corruption as possible, just as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and clean the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to cut.
and if the corruption is in the fingernail of the hand or the toenail, it is very strong that thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears; and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you;
and know that the incisors and sutures for covering those bones are many, according to the structure of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each kind of work;
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases; If you think about the instrument you need according to what it is suitable for.
The shoulder can be dislocated due to a cause inside or due to a cause outside.
And when you have tried medicine to cure the corruption by treating with medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member up to where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes either death or the greater evil, which is the loss of the member.
And the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and afterwards it appears to be inflamed, then this corruption spreads from member to member, and takes hold throughout the body.
So hasten to apply a covering, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion, viper, and similar ones, if the corruption is in the head of the foot, then cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, so cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, so cut at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, that's deadly, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
and so it does when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cut all the foot; and if it mounts up the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die from lack of treatment;
and the manner of cutting or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one minister down and another up, and you detach the flesh which is between the two ties with a spatula wide enough to reveal the bone;
Then the surgeon takes the thread or silk, and places a linen cloth on each side of it, so that the thread does not touch the healthy skin, and another lesion and abscess will come to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you work, then cauterize the wound hastily, or apply some restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to him at that time:
he got a boil which seemed like burning fire, and that ulcer came first in his foot of the leg, until it consumed the whole leg.
and when the man saw the ulcer, he hastened to cover the leg, and was healed.
and long time after it returned to him the corrosion or boil of the hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things responsive after the purification of the body, and he could not cease from the corrosion.
and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of causing the matter to recur; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the vital force of the man was weak;
and he became desperate entirely, and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and he was cured;
and I don't know this story except because it is done on occasion when one has need of it.
No abscess ever comes to the fatty part of the body and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then they roast and pierce, and the bowstring snaps, and the light remains white, just as with vassals. and the skin above is just as subtle as delicate drapery, and they do not run right to the bone, nor right to the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain", and are not called "fistula";
but if it is so long that it comes right to the bone or very close, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is such that you cut all around it, and just as with delicate drapery; and it does not heal because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is full of flesh, then treat it with a poultice thus:
Look if the breasts are large, and the bowels which follow are of a foul smell, then use the Egyptian medicine that is prepared thus: Take lard, and oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and put them to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
And then take of this mixture according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as a pessary for the breast, and restrain the hernia. and let the medicine remain for two hours, then strain it out saying.
do this many times, until the breasts are cleansed, and the foul odor is removed.
and at no time use the water of ashes when this medicine is present, and it is that you take ash of vine wood, and pour water over it, then let it settle, and strain it, as long as you know that the breasts are well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor Egyptian medicine nor ash water, so they liquefy with water and honey or add a little bit of lard. or you liquefy with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property to purify and cleanse, and the wine makes the blood flow.
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the skin is well purified, then liquefy with what brings forth flesh in it, and it is that you take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil and wine.
or you liquefy with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or to treat with ointments;
and if the boil on the skin is small, and the catheter of the liquefaction cannot enter it, so you enlarge it with a little iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the wound is too wide, so that only a small area at the edge or in the cleft can enter, and the purulent discharge that flows is above, then cut or move it below where it is.
And if you cannot cut the skin below as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the pus flows down to the lowest part where it is, for when the pus is very deep, so that no flesh remains to become infected and if you cannot cut the skin below as you see fit, arrange it in this manner: so that the pus flows slowly down, and do not leave anything of the pus.
so that the pus flows slowly down, and do not leave anything of the pus. and take consolidative medicines to cover the wound, and place a cloth made of linen that covers all the wound. After the wound in the breast area becomes larger than the first one, then apply ointment so that it is soft on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound in the breast to relieve the bowstring, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once.
And the one who is on top of the wound in the breast area takes it away often to relieve the bowstring, and knows what comes from the bowstring, whether it's venom or pus or enough or undigested.
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see nature bursting forth on the wound of the breast, then know that the breasts are already healing, and approaching health.
and then loosen it in the morning or the third day, and when you open the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair at all of health, for the health is approaching.
There are men who tarry unnecessarily with pitch in their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
and if his stomach is indignant, it jumps out of his chest after many days, know that his chest will not heal;
and if his chest is slow to heal and is far away, then add medicines that are wet in substance and dry in virtue, as ointment defines, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it's the last medicine.
take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in substance;
then cook it and use it;
and make the same thing with cooked honey, when defined ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire;
and then in the cloth I apply a poultice, and stretch it over the chest, and sometimes administer a remedy that is aristolongue long, and roots of lysis celestial, which is also like flour of violets and centaury; and in use of simples or compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put the honey I said on it, and use it;
and if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard parts of the limb, or in the tendons; if it is a wound of a fistula, as we have said before.
Panniculus is an abscess that arises under the inguen of the armpit of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other parts;
and when it is neglected and one does not take care, so the abscess becomes inflamed, and runs and discharges pus as long as it will run its root to the bone, and by chance all.
and comes to the corrosion just to the bone, as long as it brings stinking pain, and is the shoulder joint wide, and is the color red.
When you treat it as we said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, then it is necessary to remove all the superfluous flesh that remains of the finger, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick and bleed, it is necessary that you put a bandage under the nail that pricks the flesh, and bind it tight above, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all. then treat with ointments until he is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, so cut it, and remove the flesh, for as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal;
and if you see the joint being corrupted, so cut into it as before said, then care for it until it is healed;
and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and he feels great pain, so you must heal it first;
then cut the swelling on top of the spindle-shaped abscess by cutting across it, and be careful that the knife does not come to the flesh which is underneath the swelling, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes;
The vertebrae which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshly, and by chance there is one or it has bones, and sometimes it has an angle, and one of these is born at the root of the jointure, or the birth is in some of the vertebra.
He who is born in any part of the joint does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the joint moves by chance;
The size of one who is fat is light, in such a manner: the measurement is taken from the root of a wide spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if it holds too tight.
In the one who is born or has it in the back night, you should first cut away the fat around to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable thread for them, then cure it until it is healed.
The sores that come to the toes together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
If you need to repair that wound, so that it should be restored according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or wet cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wound is sewn, as it should be.
If sores come to any of his toes with the palm, then cut off that sore as is necessary.
Vessels are swollen and greatly inflamed with excessive melancholic humors that come to many members of the body;
and more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer to them sometimes purging with oil of cole, and then the remedy of the basil.
The ironing cure is according to two manners: One is how they bleed, and draw out the black blood. And the other manner is that you open a vein, and drain it completely.
The cutting is according to this manner: First, rise the leg of hot water very strongly, until the great blood is thinned, then strain the patient's leg from above the hock joint to the part below the knee.
Then cut the vein in one place or two or three, with a wide incision, then lift and drain completely the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's virtues can withstand.
and then bind it, and command that he hold off eating meat until black blood flows freely;
and recommence evacuation and cleansing when the veins are empty, and it is harmful to the patient.
The remedies for him are according to this manner: wash the leg of the patient, if it has many hairs, then put him in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and fill the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat him by the fire, and then cut into the vein at the long part of the thigh or in the area below the knee;
then apply ointment to the wound, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when you touch;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white cord;
After placing the splint below, so that it is raised from the skin, and then bend it to a light angle, and then place it in another position above three folds.
Then skin the flesh above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the splint, just as you did, and bend it to another angle, just as you did first.
Then make another cut, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut to the joint of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second angle.
Then stretch it from angle to angle, until it is all loose, then cut.
And if you can't pull and lift it, then put an awl on all the strong doubled thread, and tie and pull, and put below the splint, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out. and guard lest she copes, for if she copes, one cannot then draw or lift her, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have treated it all, put a moist cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the location of the wound; and care for him until he is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and bent together, and it's not straight, as we said, then you must cut it irregularly, but don't block it; and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it can open the vein;
and it is of thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is set in legs, in hot places where there are no herbs or tree, and on land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it is elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of the corruption that comes from below the skin, as serpents and worms are born inside the body and are set between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this flux are that it comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then the pustules change, and the flux begins to come out, just as a root of a plant.
When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one foot and a half to two feet, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it becomes inflamed again, wrap it around the cloth, and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root until it is entirely removed. for if you cut it, so it enters into the flesh, and brings forth an abscess and inflammation where it is, and a bad illness;
for which reason it is necessary to treat it little by little up to the head, and leave nothing behind in the body;
and it sometimes happens that this vein when treated with ten or twenty palms in length, and one man came to me, whose was twenty palms long, and when you cut it, so it bursts forth or becomes a perforation, and the incision goes all the way down to the bottom, so that everything flows out;
and the matter inside is emptied, and bring back to its place medicines that prevent inflammation any day, then cure it as with abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein many streams flow forth, and even when it opens up in the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out a great deal of pus, and from which it leaps.
Heal then as we have said before.
Veins that are born between skin and flesh This illness is called in our land "disease of oxen", because it often afflicts oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body rising and falling, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it bursts the skin where it goes, and jumps forth.
and is caused by some bad humors, such as those that come from venomous creatures, worms, and lice or ascarids in the stomach.
and one doubts its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye. and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot escape except when it moves:
If it is necessary then tie the place above and below with a strong cord tightly, then strike upon it and treat it well, and if the vein is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it bursts.
and the greatest harm that it causes is that it runs to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, then hold a small circle firmly below it, then strike upon it and treat it well;
and it is necessary to use the patient with cleansing of the body by soluble medicines for wicked humors, and beware of unwholesome foods that cause corruption.
from the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member;
and I saw what I am telling you. I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
and after that, I saw it rising as quickly as a worm on the shoulder, even sooner than anything, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later it ran throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
then she told me that it was circling around the body, just as I saw it.
I was very surprised how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this way before. However, I had always thought that the pain would move from one place to another, but I did not see it, just as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a thin body and her veins were uncovered, and because of this the appearance of forced constriction appeared.
and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are healthy, and who have moist bodies and veins responded.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then bind it above and below hastily, and then strike on top so that those vapors are constrained to return. and cauterize the joint;
and if you do not see it to your eyes, then use the remedy of those who restrain vapors, such as stinking pills, and viper pills, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
The diversity of their kind is that there are those who have great points, small ones, and bearded, and soldered. and of those who have two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those which are in pieces;
and that which falls in any member if it falls according to two manners: or in principal members such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you next, warn you: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not warn you at all, and the arrow is not very deep, then treat it, and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps the sphenoid which is above the brain, is when it causes scotoma, swelling, vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile. and perchance it lacks force of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps it affects the speech and voice; and jumps out of the white moist wound like pustules, and similarly bursts forth as if in a boil;
and if you notice this sign, then hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck.
The sign of the arrow when it is stuck in the heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were driven into something hard, not empty. and perhaps the arrow becomes motionless like boils, and with dark bloody discharge, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and a fainting spell. then know with certainty that death is impending.
And the sign of the arrow that strikes the liver is that without foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns color, and he sighs high and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow hits in the covering of the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and it gives great alarm and great pain and sighs; and all the members of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
And if the arrow hits the belly, and bursts forth a small amount of pus through the intestine route, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels very much pain: knows that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulders and the shoulder blade and the spine of the back and the nape and the hips and the knees and the feet, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to one man whose arrow hit the well in the root of the neck: I tried it, and pulled it out on the other side under the ear fat, and he was healed without harm.
And I pulled out an arrow that had hit in the fat of the eye under the paper underneath, and the arrow was bent, and could not be pulled out except for the point towards it, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bowstring, easy to pull without ears;
The patient was healed, and no bad accident befell him.
And extract an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrowhead is Arabic-tipped at the ear.
I extracted the splinter, and refined it to such an extent that I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And extract an arrow from a man whose belly had been pierced by it, and who thought he was dying;
and then, after passing thirty days, his condition did not change at all. I cut above the arrowhead, and extracted it, and pulled it out, without any bad accident occurring.
And if the man to whom an arrow fell on his back has a wound that is stitched up above;
and the arrowhead remained inside him, and his natural disposition did not change at all, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and was stitched the wound. and remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many others similar.
And treated an arrow wound on the king's man, who had been hit in the leg and was slightly bent to the right side; and the arrow was fully embedded.
I was called to the treatment after it had been struck three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for it in every subtle manner and did not feel it; and he felt piercing and pain below his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow I applied a poultice on the spot to attract and digest, because the swelling did not grow. and the bowstring of the arrow appeared to me.
and the bowstring of the arrow appeared to me. I put the ointment on it many days, and healed the wound above, and so the patient remained long, until he felt the arrow one day inside his house.
and he told me. I put on the wound a medicinal agent with corrosive properties for many days, until it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which was fixed in its place.
then I pressed into the opening of the wound with that medicinal agent, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and it crossed the boundaries for about 4 months, and then it abscessed so that I put in forceps, and pulled it from one side and the other, and could not come out.
Then I did not cease to invent and devise various ways of instruments, until I took it the next day with well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I carried it and restored the wound.
And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot restore: I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was entirely healed.
I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care in what I do not say, for books cannot take it all;
but wise masters compare a little with a great thing, and find nine works and nine instruments for the descending of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not exit the limbs where they are fixed except by two ways: or through the entry point where they enter, or through another place;
and that which jumps out by the side where it enters is an arrow entering a fatty organ, and sometimes it jumps out now.
And if it doesn't jump out now, then leave it until the fat is cleared around, and loosen the exit point;
and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then leave it like that for some days, and move each day;
and then it jumps out, and if it doesn't jump out, then pierce around with a very fine instrument, until the surrounding fat is widened, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is stuck in the body and cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent. and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it so that the wound becomes large;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck for two parts up to where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out.
and carefully make sure you don't break the arrow, but rather draw it more tightly.
And if you can't all at once, then leave it until the flesh around is melted, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased. And if the flowing of blood makes you opposed, then follow what we have said in its chapter about the treatment.
and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and consider how you can pull out the arrow without danger, either soon or late, or firmly or gently.
and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow hit him, for that is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot do so, then put him as the signs show you should.
The arrow that comes from another side, if it leaves anything of itself behind, or the skin is swollen where one can see or sense it.
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out. If it jumps now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if she cannot come out, then let her stay a bit longer and then start extracting again until she comes out.
and if the arrow is stuck in it, then push it all the way through.
and if the arrow falls, and you see fit to administer poultice, then administer an instrument that is hairy, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument.
and then push through, and if the arrow is stuck, then push the instrument with the entering point into it, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is stuck, so you should cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it needs to be treated.
And if the arrow falls or breaks or is in the stomach or bladder or chest, and it is nearby, and you can cover over it, then cover it.
and take care not to cut the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary. and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: great, small, and tiny, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is also like the plumage of a bird, to push against the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped:
There are thirty-one veins for healing, out of which sixteen are in the head, that is to say: Two veins that are behind the ears, which are called the "herbech" pair; and two arteries that are in both temples appearing; and two veins that are in the inner corners of both eyes, which are called "aspirs"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the neck; and two veins that are in the throat; and two veins that are on the upper lip above the mouth, and these are called "augeherich"; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins which we commonly use are those in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people commonly call it "the vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "femoral", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and people commonly call it "the vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and people commonly call it "the vein of the belly", and it is above the fibula, and it is that one which we use when bleeding, which opens up clearly above the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the wrist and the ankle, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot are three veins: One is under the curvature of the pouch of the left side, and the second is at the ankle of the right side. and the vein called "nesse" that is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps the ancient cathars and migraines;
and the quality of the bleeding is such as I tell you, and it is that you lift the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a string, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: which then returns to your thumb, and where you feel the pulsation below your thumb, then press down;
Then take the lancet, and thrust it under the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand up to all of the vein above, and cut and loosen the skin and the vein well so that you can traverse it, and make blood come out until you see.
Then strain and bind it, until it is healed.
and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
The veins of the two arteries that are in the two temples, are worth for an old headache, and sode, and accustomed ophthalmia, and to the eyes that are filled with aged tears.
and the qualities of the blood are such as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, until the two veins appear openly. and feels the pulse below your shoulder, and then signs to cease;
Then lift the key on the vein above to your two fingers, and put the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up and cut it, just as you did in two other veins, and make the wound bleed according to your need.
Then release the patient, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top. and then bind it firmly, and let it be until it is healed;
and we have spoken of their cutting and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The vein on the forehead is worth just as much as the cephalic vein for diseases of the face, ancient migraines, and rashes.
and its quality is that the patient strains his neck in twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fossor", which has this shape:
And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let two drops of blood come out according to how much you see; Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is well-bled and not once does a wide flame appear.
However, it is not fitting that the flames be too large; and let it bleed across, because the bone is near, and by chance break the blood flow when it is subtle.
The blood from the two veins that are in the armpits so helps the eyes, and the pustule, and the rubor, and the oriel in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their blood is such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting some ligament, just as before;
Then health, and let the wound be of the traverse, a little bit long of the flame, a little wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they will break.
Then make a bandage of blood, as much as you need it, and then bind on cotton, and bind it well.
The blood of the vein of the neck is valuable for ague, and for excessive sweating, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old.
and the quality of the blood is that the patient strangles his neck, then strains his head to the left hand side, and takes the subtle long flame, and inserts it into the gap between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now.
and do not go too far into depth, and make a bandage with blood according to your necessity, then tie it for one night, because it is very quickly restored;
The sap of the two gum trees greatly helps in the tightening of the vein, and at the beginning of inflammation, and with many diseases, and with swelling, and with corrosion, and with sores, and boils;
and the quality of the sap is that the patient stretches their neck between one and the other, as we have said;
and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient take a seat, then open the vein of the long one a little bit wide, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is necessary;
then repair the other side on the other vein, then loosen the ligament, and hold it gently with moderate pressure so that the patient does not choke; and let him be until morning, when the wound is healed.
of the healing of books The vein of the veins above the lips so helps in bleeding in the mouth, and in corruption of gums, and splits in lips, and around.
And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by their black color and by the small black veins around them;
then cut one and the other, and if you don't recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the thicker one on each side, and do the same with both veins above and below, for it is the same method.
of the healing below the tongue The wound of the veins that are under the tongue so helps after the wounding of the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and with mouth diseases, and with eye diseases.
and the qualities of the wounder are that the patient takes between your hands before the sun, and lifts up their tongue, and gazes downward in each corner at a black vein.
heal then both of them, and do not go too far into the depth, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the throat that are commonly cured are cured in two manners:
or with a blow of all the flame mercurial large, or olive subtle as cutters cutting, and it is called "anasil"; and they are large and subtle according to the largeness and constriction of the veins. The form of the fine gash is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
It is necessary to have a device for opening veins which are full of thick blood that appears on the surface and contain thick blood and turmoil. and this is the form of olive oil.
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, and at the neck, and at the breast, and at the belly.
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed profusely, and to beware of the artery that is underneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a great flow of blood comes forth, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said. and one must not pierce the flame, but rather cut as with a sickle.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary that you manipulate it, and change another. where you want any blood to come from him, or you let a vein open up in his arm instead: it appears obviously; and the skin of the ankle is numb, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place of incision, and then bind the arm, and open up the vein at the numb ankle. and watch that you do not hit the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is of the artery: then avoid it.
And if you see it come out at the top like a child's urine, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Hurry then, and place your knife on lengthwise, then remove your knife when the blood is still, as it often happens. if he takes up his arm, and leaves it thus, and does not move the patient's arm;
and be on fear, and do not move the patient until he is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched, and he complains, and medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the vessel will shrink. and stop the bleeding.
And take a wrapping of linen, and cut it, and take one half and bind it on well until the next day.
if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the swelling is not at all diminished in many dispositions due to the small size of the wound, and the force of the ligament of the arm.
The vein in the arm is so well-aided that it bleeds from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary of the nerve that is below, and if he goes too deep, he will find the nerve, and it will swell and the bleeding will cease, and by chance cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in certain men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you close the veins with the instrument anusil. and avoid hitting the nerve at your peril.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The surgical treatment of the cephalic vein helps, which draws blood from the head and assists with healing.
And it is necessary to bleed into the olive vein or the myrtle vein, for this is the most saving of all veins, because there are no nerves nor arteries beneath. However, it is necessary to seek the lighter place, and do not distress anything if it does not work the first time, and one recommences. and by chance the places swell in some people, when one tries the first time, but it does not distress anything.
The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is ordered only to preserve health and to forestall future illnesses.
and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are on the forehead: It is to know, cephalic, swift, and basilica; and one should purify oneself at the beginning of prayer in summer, and after eating in autumn and winter when signs of repletion appear;
and one should purify oneself on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The purification that is administered against diseases has no fixed duration, but whenever need arises by day or night, in all hours and at all times;
and it is not necessary to purify children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit except for less than seven months. Nor should the elderly who have passed 60 years not be cauterized.
And when someone wants to purify themselves, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema, if they have many retained farts, so that the veins do not attract superfluous substances from the intestines which are harmful to the main members.
That which is too full of meats does not heal well, nor one who is drunk, until he is sober again, nor dropsical.
And one does not heal well after passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequenting with women, and toil, watching, and worrying, and all that comes from a fault in virtue, or through something of arm or body.
Then balance the humors, if the blood is thick, by means of foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
Then enter a bath, if nothing hinders you, to subtlety the blood, and to heal the wound around the third rib, as we have said.
and keep that day free from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
and be calm and joyful, and let the surgeon be higher than the one being operated on, and stroke the arm two or three times, then loosen the ligament above gradually, because when it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow.
and then stroke the joint with hands, until the veins swell, and feel it;
then moisten the surgeon's hand with an old piece of oil, then put his left hand's thumb on the vein below the joint a little bit where he wants to cut, so that the vein does not collapse and fail from being cut.
For there are veins that flow like strings to the surgeon, and those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the flame upon them, the flame retires, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with such people. and if the vein is opened too much, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the surgeons be informed about these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, then it recommences again a little below or above that place, if the swelling is not present.
And if the swelling is present and the patient is frightened, let it stay one or two days and do not bind the arm: in case an abscess may form;
do not enter the bath, then the healing begins again if it pleases him;
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you see, then trust in that same wound to flow right throughout.
and work with some haste, yet when the swelling subsides; for it often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the joint swelling, do not recommence the bleeding, and put on a little bit of oil, for it lightens the body's blood, and is good in this joint with the mixture of oil.
and thus administer the oil mixture to each wound that you treat veins for to stem the flow of blood.
and the same thing is done with a triangle and a bow of eyes when one puts it on the joint; so that the blood flows and separates when it is too thick.
And if there comes a great abscess, which often happens especially when it is not cleansed except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, so hasten and put on the joint a moist sponge in water and a little warm, and restrain it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains at its place for several days with no blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him. and if you see, put on top something of aloes or myrrh mixed with camphor, ointment, or similar.
And often there occurs abscess and swelling at the joint of the temple.
put then your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad swelling. Therefore do not put on top anything of what we have said, for by chance there is a cut short of the artery.
but make it dry with an embalming agent to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
Since the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red. And if you see pus, let it drain off until it becomes subtle. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the person who is weak and feeble, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and have the incisions wide.
and for someone who is feeble, do the opposite, and make them well gradually and often, and one should heal them by cutting across, not piercing.
and this way of healing is preserved from the disfigurement of blood and the compression of nerves, and it is more effective than the healing of a long or wide wound.
And for the person whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in apple juice. If he is fevered, treat with blood three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, bleed him before the surgery and use a moist poultice in a sweet syrup, or in a syrup of aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he beats on the vein, after a lot of blood has come out, it is necessary that he drinks pottage made from bones, and subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to blow on his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And whoever wants to blow on his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then heals in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to heal on another side, then should heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already fevered, and it brings on a fever; if it needs to be bled out in large quantities, and to dilate the pore so that it can reach as far as the navel; then you will reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his pulse as he recovers, so that death does not come in lieu of navel, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
and it's not necessary when you see loosen the arm, and make blood come out the second time, and the pore is closed, that you press strongly there; If he is bent, let him stretch out his arm quickly, for it would be wrong.
but let him leave it until it heals the second time; or you puncture at the tip of the flame until the blood that has congealed comes out through the vein and put a poultice on it and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity demands drawing out blood a second time, then let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein on the arm is healed at the site of the wound because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the scab is red.
then bind it moderately so that the vein opens well, then heal it now by piercing across, not along or lengthwise.
and let the wound be wide, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and if the blood does not come out, then put the hand in hot water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in winter, then do not put the hand in hot water at all, for it stays colder than in summer.
and the vein of this wound is safer than all other wounds, for there is no artery or nerve.
The vein of the gallbladder on the right hand side is worth more than all other diseases of the liver, and this is how:
strain the hand and put it in hot water until the vein is emptied, if one sees it; and if the vein crosses over, and you cut it from end to end, then nothing will hurt.
and don't go too far in depth, for the nerves are underneath all the stripped flesh, and then put the hand in hot water if the abscess is frozen in the wound and can't come out.
And when you have bled the blood as much as is needed, then put oil and seal on the vein to close it quickly, and do the same with each section.
The wound on the left hand side is worth as much to the disease of mice as it is to the illness of the right side; and does just as I told you there.
The wound of the Sophene is worth to all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of his urine are such that the patient pours their foot into hot water, and rubs on the vein until it bleeds, and lies above the ankle joint. and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot they go out much water.
then the urine will be either more abundant or larger drops or at the ankle, which is worth more.
And if you take the urine from the foot, then beware of the worms that are below, and the urine should also pass as it is in cutting.
and let the flames be extinguished.
And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the urine fails the first time, then it should start again a little above, because the bone is salty.
nor doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same to the other foot in equal manner.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its incision is worth to the pain of the haunch when it's for hot blood.
And the qualities of his blood are such that the patient goes into a bath and strains above the ankle four times while twisting, because otherwise the vein does not open.
and if it opens, let blood flow in all ways that you can, and crossing over; and be careful to stop it, for the wound is clean, and it has been opened to many people.
and be careful to stop it, for the wound is clean, and it has been opened to many people. And if you do not stop it, let blood flow from the part that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and take care of the nerves;
and let as much blood flow as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on a cloth and bind it tightly; it is now healed.
Poultices are made from horns, or earth, or glass;
and ventosity is done in two manners: or by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
And this ventosity which is without wounding is done in two manners: or it is all fire, or not on fire;
and ventosity which is done by wounding and drawing blood is done in 14 parts of the body, one of which is all on the top of the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others in both sides of the neck; and the ventosity below the chin; and the ventosity between the shoulders; and the ventosity above the hips; and the ventosities in both arms; and the ventosities in both legs; and the poultices of the two ankles;
and the bleeding is not treated with blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it has not weakened anyone much, just as one does when treating a wound; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all fire or sense of fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if due to necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for habits, then we should administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time;
for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and if there are those who become replete and ruddy in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darken around the eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are bleeding; and if there are such people who think, and see by looking at blood and injured and dead and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it's during the month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The mixture of the medicine helps with the headache that comes to the eyes and does not belong after the evacuation of the whole body.
and this purgation is instead of the medicine for the head, and does not belong to someone who has a cold complexion or has cathartic, for it would do them very great harm.
and therefore it does not belong to the elderly or those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, and because of this it's necessary to put the venesection a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The purgation in the neck is instead of the medicine for the head and the throat, and therefore it is good for constriction of the belly, and for opening of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion.
and it is necessary to press gently, for if she holds too tightly, so one incurs obstruction of the bowel or stomach and heart.
The vapors of the two chest cavities of the neck are equal to the pains of the head, and obtalmia and emigration, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the health of the basilica.
and it is necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch out their hand to put down, lest they compress the artery and let forth streams of blood.
The vapors below the chin are equal to sickness of the mouth, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the two lips.
The venesections of the shoulders are worth for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The vapors of the sides are equal to those of three veins of the arm, for they bring forth blood from these large veins;
and command the surgeon not to cut too deeply by fontanelle, for the bones are full of flesh, and there is knowledge below nerves and arteries.
The poultice that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the poultice be large and made of earth, so that it can do well in drawing. and by chance, if she were subtle, she would break; and would make great wounds.
The poultices of the legs are very good, for they draw blood from all the body, and are valuable for old pains in the reins, and kidneys, and bladder, and restore flowers.
and are in place of the two soffens, and the two shins, and yet they enfeeble the body after long use, and bring forth faintness in many dispositions.
The way to put the poultice is that you put it first empty, and then suck it temporarily, and put it quickly, and move it equally, and do not stop doing so, until you see the red place and swollen, and appear the red of blood.
Then be bold, and put on poultices, and take heed of the condition of bodies, for there are some who have tough flesh, and clear pores. It is necessary to wound only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one a little deep. and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to wound twice: the first time to subtlety open the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to wound a third time;
and when we want to draw out a little blood little by little, if we can only suffer it once. And if we want much blood, if we often start again;
and if the blood is thick, then pierce it deep, and make sure that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have hard skin and are robust, with numerous pores, that you anoint the sores of the oil drops which are appetizing and dissolving. if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed of cucumber oil;
and if it is in winter, with oil of wormwood, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the surplus is large and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
And if the person has tender skin and large pores, there is no need to put oil on them, but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And the one who has much moisture, should rise up with ease, or with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive swelling rise from old wine, or water of sycamore, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it does not become well without a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two;
and it does not sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be poulticed and when he is being poulticed.
And beware of him who is healing is choleric, and his blood is too hot and inflamed; so it is necessary that he take cold things, such as pomegranate seeds and endive and lettuce at ease, and similar things; and drink a little, and hare's flesh, and moist meats.
and drink a little, and hare's flesh, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, so take honey syrup, and scented wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and drink little, and drink a little, and eat small birds and small capon.
and when he gets winded, so must he drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before the ventosation, or after, to comfort the main members. and let the blood be thinned out, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The cupping glasses that are applied without hurting are those that are applied on the liver, and on the belly, and podagra, and on the stomach and bowels and reins and hip, for those members do not tolerate being hurt elsewhere, and one does it only to draw blood from member to member, just as we apply them to the breasts when milk flows.
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we apply cupping glasses to the stomach and bowels to reduce the member.
and stops the pain when there is ulceration or stone, if it stops by its attractive virtue by chance the ulceration, or removes the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these poultices are administered empty so that they suck only. and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain water, as in diseases of the eyes, and in such a way one fills the poultice with hot water only, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
And it should be two fingers and a half palm long, and have on the edge around the middle one small pit, like to lodge an awl, and be of clay, soft before so that it does not wound the patient when putting it on the member.
and it should have in the middle a rod of cross-sectioned clay or iron, to put a candle holder on, and great and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for children's poultices are different from old people's, and thin ones from fat ones.
And one should thus put this poultice on the limb:
take the candle of wax or linen, and put it in the poultice across the rod that is in the poultice, so that the light is at the bottom of the poultice that it may not burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and it should be on the ulcer that we have said, so that when you want, if there is moisture, and one removes the poultice;
and take the linen as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the cupping glass therefore which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, all aquosity, has no horn nor pierce, and is not administered more than once when it is full of aquosity, and is placed on the member so only;
and that is the shape:
Cups are not administered more than once except in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in bony limbs stripped of flesh, such as the head or neck, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find cups that are in sweet and clear water without perturbation, then take them;
and put one in sweet water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be bled with vein and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on bandages;
and when they are clean and dry, if it is a place where you can put a poultice, then put one there, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, lift the limb slightly and then with water, very well, and then tighten it;
and if the swelling heals too late after the application of bandages, soak a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the swelling is reduced.
and if the swelling is multiple, put on crushed Vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is reduced.
or you put a handful of peeled peas on the limb and let them stick to it until they are dry, which will stop it now.
and if you need more supplies, take other bandages.
and if the bandages don't want to take, wipe the fresh blood on the wound, or stick an awl in until the blood flows out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere.
and when you see that they are falling off, powder on a small amount of alum and salt or ashes, so they will stick now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish men will despise this chapter, for they have never seen anything like it in the ancient books nor read a letter about it.
and because of this reason is strange the science in our land, for I never found any good;
and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, and I have described to you what is contained in this chapter
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue to this book, the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who have been proved may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, then it is necessary to hasten to heal the sick person from one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old people. or if the weather is not very cold, or too hot;
and to abate cold cholers, that is to say, cold joints, and hare's flesh and deer's flesh, and not drink wine, nor eat fat meats, and not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of hot aposteme, or spreading of matter in the member;
so that the patient may recover under their previous government, as they had used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with flesh that makes good nourishment, or if they have viscosity, as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and peas, and pork belly, and sheep's fat, and fresh fish, and big wine, and similar things. For good nourishment quickly heals the wound and the fracture.
And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well set or united according to their nature because of the wasting away of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but there is no care, reset on the broken bone with large clamps that bind and join the member together, until it becomes strong again as before; and do not leave him from his work, and for that reason he must be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is one thing, and the fracture of the breast or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that occur in a rounded shape, and others in a curved one, like the cut of a quill to write.
For there are fractures that occur in a rounded shape, and others in a curved one, like the cut of a quill to write. And if with wound, and fracture into a small crack.
And each person should have their own instrument and proper tool in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
and the breaking of the bone is known by what the joint is twisted, and it opens well through a gap, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twistiness nor creaking, and the patient does not feel great pain, since there is no break;
but it can well have twistiness, or a split, or a small break. So do not move it by hand, but put on medicines that come later, and then restrain it now subtly.
And know that the breakage that goes in an arm, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them together evenly, so that abscesses do not come to life.
and if abscesses arise, he should leave it alone for a day, until the abscess is pacified;
then put it back together evenly as you can lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of one who has pieces.
then bind it, as is necessary afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and they stretch from two parts, whether it be hand or foot, or at your hand it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and to your hand.
and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, you will join them by all means with their places as best you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not come to harm or pain.
and set the two bones of the skull according to the best forms.
And he feels well with his hand if it seems to him that it is not well.
so that it is set straight and not strained too much, nor pressed as those who bring them about by their abscessed work heat and contraction to the member, as we have often seen.
And when the member is fixed, then punish the patient well so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, nor turning or in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet fixed, and it must be put in such a condition that he feels no pain;
and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet fixed, and it must be put in such a condition that he feels no pain; and take care that it is set straightly, lest twistedness comes to pass when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken member is as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small members, such as wrists and thumbs and similar things: so it is necessary to wrap soft and subtle linen drapes. and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: so it is necessary to wrap with a wide and strong bandage, for the broad bandages encircle the whole great member and restrain it evenly from all sides, so that there is no crease.
then bind around with light bandages, three turns or four according to the member, and strain your hand a little on all the bandage, then go up above the break and bind it less, so that the break will soon move away from the break.
and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you take hold of a great part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage and wrap it around again above the broken member.
Then return to the part below the break, and strain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first chapter above;
Then place between the stitches strips of linen or cloths, until it is entirely even, then tie all above with bandages, and then put well-made bands on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if it has swelling or abscess, then put something soothing and hot on top that removes the swelling, and let it be like that for a few days;
Then strain on top of the bands, and be made of a quarter of a well-waxed cane, or of fir wood from which one makes nails, or of palm sapwood, and be according to this shape:
But it is necessary that the band that you put on top of the break is a bit bigger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as is necessary for the member of small or great size; then steady it above the stars just as you did at the first joint, then place a thread smoothly above the scar; the tighter it is above, the looser below;
and it is necessary that the thread be middle-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of those who make their joints from twisted linen threads, and it's a great error, for the joint cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it is not necessary that there be less than a span between each star.
And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the straining in their healthy skin, then put underneath them linen cloths or chopped wool, so that he does not get injured.
When the wound is with the breakage and the ligaments are torn, I will say the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to bind with splints all broken limbs on the first day. For when the member is large, it is not necessary to place stars more than after IV or VII days, or more according to your security and depending on the heat of the abscess.
and here is the way of ancient poultices to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting:
and it is that you take flour that is left over from the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, to use, and this is the common manner of the poultice restoring breakage in various ways, and likewise for women and little children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of poultice restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: take aloes and ladanum and balsamum and asafoetida and gum arabic and myrrh, in the proportion of one to ten. myrrh and aloes, in the proportion of one to five; aloe eight times; and make powder, and mix with egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restore broken bones, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugwort and balm of meadow; mirror and aloe, to the amount of nine [parts]; acacia, to the amount of six [parts]; bolic Armenian, to the amount of ten [parts], and grind it well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones that are separated from their places, and soothes the pain that occurs, and they use it to shape the bone, and to break the brisement: Take a new linen, and boil it in ash and oil, and put it on the place.
These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removing pains.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried leaves of fig tree and earth leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of bone breakage and to ease the remaining abscess. Take the root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, of each a part;
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix it with moist water of coriander or water, and apply.
Another way to plaster, stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take the root of wormwood, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each a part; and grind, and mix with saltwater or sweet water or with wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not put on the broken limb to restore it anything more than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken limb, to restore, things slightly hot and dry, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to plaster that is worth for wound and pain: Take mugaith and sheep's wool, or owl feathers, and vermilion, and equal parts, and grind them, and make a plaster out of it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place; if you do not loosen it for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
and take lighter cloth, and moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind with a nutmeg, until you are sure of no heat apostema.
and let the inflammation of the member cease, and may the pain be removed, then resume the subtle binding, and add a little poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before. and bind it subtly until he is healed.
And if you see that apostema has ceased to be hot and red, and pain and swelling are gone entirely, and you need poultice and bandaging, then begin again, as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not remove it until after 3 days or 4 or 5. and at no time leave it for 20 days, according to what we see, until the swelling subsides and approaches the skin's surface.
then bind it more tightly than before, and increase his flesh, as I said beforehand.
and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that no nourishment can come; then arise hot water and temperate it, every time you loosen it, and adjust the temperature a little bit each hour;
through this work therefore cut off the nourishment from the member, and immediately amend what foolish physicians do, who leave the member in a twisted state;
it's bad, and if it's painful work, and I don't see anything else except to ease the pain and work correctly.
There are many ways of breakages, and diverse shapes, and the causes are assigned;
for there are breakages that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone takes away all the bone up to the notch which is below the bone, as happens in a hatchet or a fist; and therefore this manner of breaking is called "haichure".
Where the sword cuts through bone above its surface without piercing, and this manner of breaking is called "absolute".
and it is the wound from these two breakings great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or splitting or collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent breaking, which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound that is opened in the bone is as fine as a hair, and it is a small crack, and therefore this breaking is called "capillary".
and if the wound that is made by piercing with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and makes the bone fragment enter downward, and it is so loose as when blacksmiths strike sparks on the forges. so the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have moist skulls, as is the skull of an infant.
and happens to all these types of breakage where small pieces are torn away as they are. and I will speak to him in his place.
And we know all kinds of breakings by the detachment above them, and the inquiry is made through probing, and by the corrupted flesh that is above.
The capillary likeness is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then opens up the black break.
In the treatment of the break, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, numbness, fever, and the eyes issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you see no unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to take out the bone before the 14th day of the moon, as soon as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to take out the bone before the seventh day, as soon as the skin below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents that we have said come.
And if the breaking of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part thus:
and then you take the patient's head and uncover it above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the wound as soft as you can, and if bleeding comes to reveal the bone or abscess, provide the aid that is necessary, and then you fill the place with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and be sure of the cessation of bleeding. then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two methods of work:
One manner is that you compress at the narrow part beforehand, and this is the form:
And then put another cutting even larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have various sizes of compressions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron indeed;
and work lightly so as not to bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it's necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer compressions with tapers, not too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be above the tip a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
and it's necessary that you have many, so that each one becomes its own place in the shape of the bone, so that you have tapers for all tests.
and this is the form of three kinds of boils:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put a boil on the bone, and turn to your two [sides] until you know that the bone is pierced.
Then put the boil somewhere else, a little bit away, and do this all around, then cut into the bone space between the protuberances, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, just as we said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as pincers.
and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacrum.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you take up the force that remains in the bone to any other instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more keen and more subtle than the other incisor.
And if there remains no small bones or scales, then remove them gently with the instruments. Then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another way of working is as the Gauls say, which is more wholesome; and the load is very strong, and that's his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lenticular incisor, whose shape is:
And do not cut from one side only, and have the parts torn in two directions, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
Then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chop all around the bone, and take good care of the skin that is below.
If it is attached to the bone, then remove it lightly, for one removes it without harm or fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach to the layer, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reassemble that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to administer in each place the most suitable thing, according to the work and figure of the break.
So scrape with great rasps, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-cutting and subtle breaking, it is necessary that you bring about a cause in accordance with its direction.
and this is something that is not answered to him who has put his study in this art.
And if the sores are uncovered, then you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth. and make it as lightweight as you can, so that you do not burden the sore, then administer above the other linen, and do not strain it too much except until it holds the wound alone.
and let it be thus for one or two days, until the abscess is appeased, then remove it, and administer medicine as with roots of linden, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things.
and make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines from time to time without biting.
and take care that the wound is clean from time to time, so you do not leave the ointment off or allow bowels to gather on the linen of the brain, for when bowels assemble above the cerebral cloth, they will run and burst forth, causing great harm to the patient.
for when you put a biting thing on the wound, it festers above. Take care therefore, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if no swelling comes from it except because of the medicine you have put on, which has that virtue, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix one cloth with it, and put it on the wound. then perform the cure by methods that are necessary until he is healed.
Know that sometimes are broken the two parts of the nail above, or one alone by itself, because they are two bones.
and that one below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert your small awl or perforator into the nail and place this break even with the tip of the index finger and at the edge by pushing forward, until the nail regains its natural shape. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and the finger cannot return to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a small rod.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it again, and hasten to restore the first part the next day, if you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is appeased, then insert a piece of linen into the tip of the nail, if the break is in one part.
Where you push one apart from the other, if there is a break inside. and be so large that they fill the pores of the nails.
And some physicians say one must grease the tents with butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with the making of a mixture of chicken broth and mill powder; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is firm and the ligaments are hardened.
And sometimes put in or near the nail pens of goose, instead of tents, and if there is a soft draping around, and holds the breakage, and blows the patient around. or make what you see.
And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of diachylon.
And if the abscess does not come forth, then apply a poultice by deferral, made from barley flour and incense powder, mixed with chicken broth, and then place it on light cauterizations, and do not bind the nail.
et if the breaking of the egg is small and it is broken into little pieces so lead them to suitable instruments for that then sew up the opening and take care of things by cauterizing and binding as with suitable poultices and ointments for that
and if there is no wound inside the egg so treat it with tents and put in plugs of cloth until it is healed.
When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outwardly, and the break is only outwardly so far as to be felt by the tongue inwardly, one can hardly recognize it.
It is necessary, if the breaking is on the right side, that you put your two index fingers in the mouth of the patient. and if the breaking is on the left jawbone, put your two index fingers of the right hand and put the breaking inside gently and secure it with the other hand by pushing forward and make even.
And if the breakage of the jaw is dislocated in .ij., it is necessary that you administer an extension of .ij. parts, until it be equal.
And if the movement of the teeth causes displacement or routing, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on top of the broken jawbone a poultice and put on top a doubled cloth. and place on his shoulder a great strap well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it on at the muscle that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light victuals.
And if you see that the swelling changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then replace with what has changed. and apply poultice on it, with powder of the mill mixed with a plenty of egg white or semolina flour, after you have removed the cerote.
and put on a light linen poultice, and if the poultice dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until he is healed. many times are healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes forth, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, remove no part of the bone that has been taken out; if subtlety of osteum comes with suitable instruments to this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by fire according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then cover the wound, if it is large, and put on .i. suitable plasters to promote flesh, until he be healed.
The shoulder is broken many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the breakage is in three manners:
or it is broken and separated into two, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore.
where there is breakage with wound.
And the work is when the breakage has no wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the assistant which feels the broken shoulder. and the other stretches the neck towards the part.
then set the breakage evenly to your knees, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or defect.
And if you need to stretch further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded ball of cloth or wool, and it should be as thick as your necessity requires. and lift the forceps, and hold the spear to your hand, so that you put equal the break, as it is right.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder away from the back, because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lie sovain on his habitation, and put under the shoulder .i. middle pillow, and have the ministers press down on the shoulder, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
And then address the break to your knees, and if you find fragments there, so it is necessary that you cut on.
and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join by any adjustment, then cut it at one of the chisels you have. but put under the forceps this instrument, to hold down the splinter.
and make it like a spoon, and is not cut off, and be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work.
and have two heads, as you see, and be one wide, and the other long, such as is the shape of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, if it is to be cut open, and the suppuration is small, or you doubt the abscess, if you use bandages and tents according to its size.
And if a hot abscess comes forth, then soak one cloth in rose oil and lard and wine, and put it on.
The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put powder from the mill and equal egg yolk on the bone, and put light poultices above, and place a stake under the splint, if you need one. then take a very wide band of palm width, then put the doubled cloth on top of the poultices and the emplaster. then take a thin strip of three fingerbreadths in width and length, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band are hanging down. and place the steel on the bruise, and turn the bandage on the good shoulder, and below the healthy armpit, and below the sick armpit; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the bruise well, and you clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments slacken, then restrain it;
and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit, so as to lift the shoulder up high; so that the bruise of the shoulder blade will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind his arm to his neck, and do not release it unless bad accidents come, until twenty days;
then start the poultice again, if you see that he needs it, and strain it and leave it so, until he is restored;
and she is restored to the greatest extent in 28 days, and less at some men.
of the shoulder break
It often happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and one cannot feel it except by touching;
if the appliance conforms to the shape of the breakage, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
then put powder of mill on the place with a great deal of egg-white, and gentle poultices, and cover it with a double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle bandage, a little bit wider than the shoulder, and underneath the bandage are strips in some place of the shoulder, so tie that hair with linen bandages, so that the bandage is even;
and then bind it all with a great tight bandage, so that the bandage does not move from its place, and look at the tie each day;
and every time he stretches, if it is strained, and sets the thread equal if it is far from its place, and lies the patient on his side.
and the shoulder has been reset in 20 days or 25.
And when this number is complete, if he loosens, and be sure, for it is not the bone that becomes lighter quickly.
And if a piece of bone projects forward and points downward below the knee, then do so above and below it, making the bone that we have said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe an abscess.
Of the breaking of the ribs.
The weight is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end.
And when it is broken in mid-air, so it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the veins in the broken bone, and it seems to be well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and takes great care to set it equal in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
then put on plasters and poultices above the fine salt estuary or other light wood, and envelop it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the tie back around to the back, and strain it gently, and reward each hour with an oil, and if it relapses, then restrain it;
and if it is necessary to remove, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes from the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and remove it, and scrape off the plaster, and treat what has come out with methods of cure;
then reset the plaster, and restrain it until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the ribs.
Know that the breakage of the ribs does not occur except in large places after the back and within the head, and do not bend except because they are slippery; and he feels well in the inquiry as one must.
And the restoration is that you set equal the break, as it is necessary. And then apply plaster, and bind with a strap, if you need to.
And if the break in the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as with a palsy, for the bone pierces the flesh. and it leads to punctures, and all and vomits great pouring of blood, and this is from grievous health, and the old men have put great artifice.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that fill the belly to push the break backward.
We do not do so, lest hot abscesses come there, if it has not already come. And if it has come, then let it heal.
And some of them say that you should apply poultices on the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the poultice will attract the superfluities to the place due to the weakness of condition.
And some of us say that one should cover the site with wet wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to put equal pressure on it, then be careful with the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear by the bone which pierces the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to guard the cavity.
and then one must cut the bone, and draw it out lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound together if it is large, and treat with poultices until he is healed.
And if an abscess comes forth, one puts moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it and applies them to the area.
and cures the part where the abscess is located until it is healed, and makes sure to apply poultices on the outer surface where it needs to be, until he is healed.
and also on the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that he is mortal in many conditions, and if they are numb and feel well when they are strained and pricked, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient is healed, if one applies care.
And if a similar thing happens on the spine of the back, and you see that he is not healed or not, then take care to see if his feet are softened, and if there is an accident in his hands, and on his back there is windiness and evacuation without his consent.
and when one has sewn it onto his belly, there is sudden ejection without will. And when he is oppressed on his back and wishes to rest, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: if he does not toil much in his treatment.
And if these accidents do not come to him, then the thing is easier.
And the treatment is that you apply heat if there is a warm abscess, and smear oil of rose or oil of hen's egg on it until it is pacified.
then put on one of the soothing and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if any bone is exposed, it is necessary to cover it with a kerchief; and extract the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then treat with ointment applying flesh, until he is healed.
and if the bone of the head is broken, which is called the "kowe", then put your pouch in your left hand and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the poultice and steel on top if you need.
then strain it, and if there is devoured bone, do so above, and extract the bone, and heal the wound until it is sound.
Of the breaking of the hipbone.
Sometimes the bone of the loin is broken, and if it is, then there follows a slight diminution to the head; and make it two long, and decline at the parting, and come to the patient's pain in place, and pierce, and swell that which breaks.
And the restoration is that you stretch your hand up, as far as you are above the breakage; and knows what kind of breakage and shape it is;
and if the breakage is only in the head, then set that breakage straight away, until it has its natural shape.
And if the break is of great length or it declines inwardly, then cause the patient to lie on his belly until the restoration of that break is accomplished. And when you have set it straight, then apply a poultice, and then apply a linen or leather bandage, and hold the breakage in place so that it does not move.
and bind the limb beneath the ribs, until the joints are equal. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
And if abscesses arise there, do not touch them, until the abscesses are appeased, and then apply what we have said before. and then come back to restoration, and hold it as is necessary, if there is no bad accident.
of the break of the shoulder.
The aid is what is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
Take one fist full of my own growing moss, according to this form:
And take two threads, and weave them up high, and bind the patient on the throne;
then throw the broken arm on the fist, so that it comes to rest, and have in my hand one bundle of cloth, then weave up onto some heavy thing or have the servants spread it down below;
then put the mirror on the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his hatrail, and ties the hand to his neck, then instruct two attendants to have one hold what is above the break with their hands, and the other to hold below each string, and stretch each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the linen under the bandage, and above the bandage, and extend each of the servants to their part.
And if the splint is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one thread below the throne, and the other towards the side, below the splint;
and also if the splint is towards the side, then it is necessary to put one thread lightly, without effort, so that the splint is even on the place and on the side;
Then set the break even as it is necessary, and hold it, if abscesses do not come forth.
And if abscesses do come forth, then do not hold it tight for seven days, and apply a moist compress on linen in a sitting and in rose oil, until the abscess is appeased.
Then hold it, and the manner of holding is that you put an emplaster on the break, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
and wrap it in cloth, and hold onto the shoulder, and onto the arm, so that the arm is in its natural state, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not broken.
And if you doubt that the bone is not broken, then use splints, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, with two inches of space between each splint, and have each splint so large that it passes across the break three inches from each side.
Then strain on the stars, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on binding, stronger and less straying.
And if you see the setting of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, in the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the apostema is hot, then let it be until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then look every three days at the swelling, lest it not increase or come to a head, or the numbness cannot reach the member because it is too narrow. If it addresses, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not release it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and have their hands on their stomach.
and put under the aid a clean linen cloth of equal thickness, and look every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken member does not change or become loosened.
If he is directed by the virtue of medicine, and gives him food that we have put before him, in such a manner that the food is to the first subtle. and when it begins to take hold, let it be thick.
And it is common that the aid and leg should be reset in forty days from start to finish; and then one must untie it and administer bath and ointment medicines to direct the limb.
And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, so it should be unbound after 7 days or 2 months.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus", one of which is small, and it is that which supports the socket.
and the other is great, and it is that which lies below, towards the little toe.
by chance the great humerus breaks alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small bones are broken, restoration is light, and healing.
And when the great ones are broken, then healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
If it is only a small bone that is broken, then one must stretch and extend it slightly, and set it equal.
And if it is a great bone, one should exert oneself stronger;
and stretch it above the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little ones lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, that the patient suffers no toil.
Then stretch out the ministers' arms on either side of his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above.
And then set the mirror equal, according to its best form.
And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that is loose and can be taken by the horn, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and an osteum, as we have said before.
And if with the wound there is a blow, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; Take care.
And if in the beginning of the treatment apostems appear, so take a mixture made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft. and apply the mixture gently above, until the apostems are calmed down.
And then remove the cerote, and put on the ointment of flour with a lot of egg, then place the poultices, and let the poultice of the breakage be a bit stronger and slightly larger than the others.
and know that it should have six poultices or arms in various positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two.
and hold it more above the breakage than elsewhere, and always less as you move away from there, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the cloths be soft and moist on the burn wound, and not hard or dry.
and let the cloths be soft and moist on the burn wound, and not hard or dry. and let the son (thread) be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the ligament after some days. And if any evil accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member with hot water, until those itchings are appeased.
and let the member not rest too tightly.
And then continue the stretching, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone loosened, and similar things, so address it.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little bit, and let it be like that for some days, until the swelling comes, and then restrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days.
or around him, then put his hands to his neck, and let his collars be even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back;
and know that this burn is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the mixtures and combinations of virtues.
None! It seems you provided only a title "de la brisure de la main" (of the bruise of the hand), without any text to translate. Would you like me to wait for the actual text to continue translating?
Know that on the back of the hand and in the fingers it often happens that there are bruises, and only pleasure comes many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit straight in front of him evenly.
Then place his hand on the stretched cloth and stretch out the broken bones, and make them even with the mirrors, until they are well joined.
and apply the plaster and poultices, if there is no abscess, then apply an oil according to the quantity of the wound. and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is around the parting of the plant, make a sphere of cloth and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken hand. and then wrap it in a long cloth, and apply the oil of good quality as much as the hand of the patient, and wrap it, just as is fitting.
And if the bruise is at the back, then it is necessary that you put an elevation above and another below on the plantar surface, so that the hand be open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
And if a fracture comes to any of us on the thigh, so it's the pouches, then set it even, as it should be; and hold with the sole, and if you see that one sets a straight little splint to lift the fracture, and does not move;
and if the fracture is on another thigh, such as in the index or one of the others, then set it even, and bind with the sound thigh that is after; or tie them all together in one holding, as much as it is worth, or set on a splint, such as the pouch;
and take heed in the restoration and disposition of hot abscess, and heal those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and well one sees when it turns before and behind;
and the restoration is such that one ties above the bridge and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister stretches their band to its equal part.
and that's when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the hip, so that one of the ligaments points towards the finger, and the other ligaments are below the break.
And also if it is near the knee, and then have the band below the knee, and have the stretching downward.
Then put the mirrors on the bone to its two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the band, lest abscesses do not come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it cool down and then return to your work and treatment. The splint is made in this same manner.
You should wrap above the bridge with double-layered bandages in two or three layers, and remove any superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and tie a long thread between the crotch and the leg, below the knee downward, and let the end of the thread come up.
then turn back on the leg and on the groin the bandage, then put on the breastplate stars, and put one star on the bone of the leg;
then place the lead between the leg and the groin of soft cloth to put equal tension, then start to bind strongly three times or four on the breastplate; and when you go further up on the breastplate, and loosen the tension less;
then take the two knots of thread that you have put between the leg and the groin, and bind three stars that are above, then go back down to the lower part of the thread, until you come to the foot;
and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and if there is no abscess or swelling or similar thing; And if it happens, then disconnect it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone that prick, it should be smoothed over, if possible; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the way, and pull forth; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the bone is broken in such a way that one must put splints in, as in an emergency and on the arm;
nevertheless, in this restoration made, the patient does not recover.
And know that the toe is restored in 1 day, or a little less or more, according to the various complexities.
Know that in the ligament of the knee there is a small break, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, then it is only a crack or a hole, and it occurs in every wound, and without a wound, and this seems quite good.
And the restoration is such that one sets equal what is torn to its place, so that it can be put together and moved as possible;
then apply the plaster, and put a rounded splint in it, if necessary, and restrain it as is fitting, then reward all the preparations that we have said for other breakings, such as boils and similar things; If he puts on each accident what is necessary to him, until he is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, because of which one is called "tibias" and the other is called "fibula".
and it happens in just the same way as it does with an arm break, and therefore the restoration is done equally for both leg and arm, and all work is finished. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
And if the slender bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the big bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and turns underneath.
Then administer extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly;
but nevertheless, it is necessary if the break is ugly and there are many pieces that the extension be less and more gentle; and be according to your virtue
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood that surround the leg on both sides, and be as long as the leg from the knee to below.
Then wrap the two strips around the leg above and below, and bind them together in the middle, so that the leg cannot turn to the right or left, and thus it is well.
and some attend the splints as long as the leg, and it is of wood, and place the leg in order to prevent movement, and properly do so at the break or where there is a wound;
and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or some other accident; if it cures as long as it remains sound.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
The ankle does not come to breaking, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and there are two or three positions; and there is no remedy except in more or less conditions.
And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping one another, so place the patient's foot on the earth, just as if it were flying, and then put your own foot now where the bones are lifted, then press down until they return to their places.
Then place the poultice and poultices above, and put a small table under the foot of the bed with two full pillows, then bind the foot accordingly, then that you have wrapped it with bandages around and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the tie, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the toes are broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; Then place the splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then put that table under the foot as I said, and bind it accordingly;
et if there are two or three, or more, break them, and place on each one a splint according to its size, enveloped in one drapery of linen, and hold the table under the foot. and let it be placed on top of the head of the table so that it is held well by the stomach of the foot.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, since we have discussed them; and treat each accident as it requires.
of the breaking of the bones of the thumb
When the bone of natural childbirth is broken, make the woman sit upright, then incline her to the part of the back, and hold her by the rear.
then fill the woman's natural opening with cotton, and put in as many pieces as there are stitches.
then put the woman upright, and lift her back little by little, and then let the cotton jump out until it reaches the natural entrance, and return the bone to its place with the stitches.
and when it wants to urinate, so remove the cotton, and when it has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or thereabouts: so the break will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder and tie it to the penis with a string, and fill the whole bladder in its natural way; then blow into the string strongly, until the bladder is emptied inside: nature will return to the break;
then fill it with cotton, and let it be like that for some days, until he is healed.
And when the bone of the hand or of the woman is broken, so restore it as we have said in the shin bone;
and these breaks are not hidden from one who sets their study and use to them, and pays attention to my book.
For the break signifies the right way to restoration in more than one disposition. Then understand it.
In the bowstring, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert it into the bowstring; Then wrap it in cloth around, and leave it for three days or as much as possible, and it will be healed promptly.
of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds which we have said bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then remain it with vinegar, or if you have no other remedy, then start to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, unless abscesses arise.
And if abscesses arise, then leave the restoration just to the ninth day, until the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
And if the extension is not prepared to equalize your hands, then remake this instrument of iron, which has seven or eight fingers in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon that he take three or four of them, according to what he may need in each treatment of breakage;
and be rough and slightly large, so that it does not bend at all under the compression on the member during your work, and be hollow in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "paleinche", for which reason it is necessary that the curved joint be placed on top of the visible bone. and bind it once, until it recovers, and let them be equal to each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut away the top of the bone, until the instruments have power over it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then use a suitable instrument, such as a chisel or saw, to your ability.
then remove what remains in the bone from sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
So do this until it is back in its place, then soak the rag in black vinegar and make sure it is well saturated. and do not put on the wound any ointment or other substance that has oil in it, lest you cause rot and corruption.
then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constrained with the breaking.
and many times has this been done by a foolish surgeon, and he has brought it upon the patient who is dying or being consumed. and let the ligaments be softer and more gentle than other breakages.
And if the wound is foul or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come to it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to put in candles. but wrap around it, instead of candles, hard cloths and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days the bowing of the wound, then remove what you have put on top all wine, and put healing balm on it, as ointment of four drugs and similar.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is set and healed.
And it is necessary that the members be aligned in such a way that the bow strings down lightly.
And if the bone breaks every day, and it cannot heal but keeps returning to its bow-like shape, know that there are small pieces of bone; therefore it is necessary that you gently probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these splintered pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not pull it, for many times death comes from this, but leave it until it can be reset.
by chance it may fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often come after the wound has healed, especially when it is near the joint; and it is a sad thing to see the shape of the limb. and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Take care then if it is fresh to us: if it is fresh to us then administer medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, aconite, and similar others, either one of these things or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or with the white of an egg or with oil. and put it on the back in hot poultices, and keep it well, and do not remove it for several days;
and put it on the back in hot poultices, and keep it well, and do not remove it for several days; and then remove it, and begin another one, until the knots are removed;
You strain on a piece of well-made lead; for the property of lead is that it absorbs all swelling above the limbs;
and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so scrape above, and make the excess appear; or you receive it at any scraper until it is removed, and care until it is healed.
of the member which is weak after healing
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and remains after weak and subtle limbs, which happens for many reasons: because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should be; or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member; or by excessive inflammation; or for too great movements, nor indeed at his hour; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and cause the body to be tender, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath water, and give him joy and ease;
then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and wash it often with lukewarm water, until the swelling comes to the member; and return to its natural form.
of the twisted member after healing When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken apart, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function:
so do not believe the foolish who say that you should break the member all over again, and many foolish men have done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and many evils come, and by chance death.
nevertheless, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be poulticed with hot water or moist herbs cooked like nettle leaves, and roots, and melilotus, and similar things.
and the poultice is made with a mollifying plaster, like dyaquilon well made, and you take the juice of nettle, and cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a poultice on top.
or you take fig tree fat, and grind it with hen's hair, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands. And there should be movement to each member every hour.
And if the stiffness is hardened and stubborn like stone, and it is necessary to open with a file, so it must be covered just up to the bone, at the subtle edge of the incisor lightly. and put caution and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary to bring it back into place immediately.
For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, one sets it right with sharp points at the joint;
therefore it is not proper to move it until it has deflated. many times brings shame and other pains;
however, when this happens, one should make the patient well again, then leave them until the abscess is calmed down;
then apply the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations to an end at this point.
Often happens that the jawbones are displaced downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are a little pulled out of their place, and softened a little; when they are dislocated entirely and hang towards the belly, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with words.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by several gentle movements.
And if she is whole and complete, then you must reset her quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and inserts the mirror's pouch from one of his hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts. and the other two hands should be free, in order to set it even.
and instruct the patient to relax his jawbones and move them from all sides. And the mirror adjusts it so that it returns to its place.
And if it is stuck, all the more so if they are both jawbones together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until you gently reset them.
Do not neglect to bring back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with a sense of softening, then place moist cloths on them in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, and bind it lightly with soft threads.
and the patient sleeps on his back, and their joints are between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or left, nor do they try to manipulate, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are loosened.
and then moisten what they want lightly, and do not trouble themselves to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well relaxed and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be returned to their place within an hour and are not converted back to their natural state, it comes to fever and accustomed sickness, and by chance, belly upset, and by chance, vomiting pure bile.
And when you see that, then know it is a calamity; and many times has he died to whom this has happened, within nine days.
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side inward along its continuity and of the chest, and is dislocated sometimes backward, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and stretches out his arms. and then press the joint firmly into your palm, and it will return.
then put on the poultice and the bandage, and tighten it;
and the part that is near the shoulder cannot dislocate. if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the poultice and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and thus also the shoulder joint is brought back into place when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
The shoulder is dislocated in no more than three ways:
which one is that from which it dislocates at the lower part of the socket. and the second is at the part of the chest. and it dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves.
and it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for they leap forth suddenly;
to those who have enough flesh, it leaps forth slowly and returns slowly.
And by chance it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder blade swells up with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain. and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation is when it is below towards the socket, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them manifest diversity. and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below it, on the touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an eye. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place or move with any movement at all;
and also if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly by touching;
and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reduce when it is new or if the child is sick.
And the way is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places their fists below the shoulder, and lifts the joint upwards to its place with force. and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it under [the patient's arm]; so it will come quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we have said within eight days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. and the poultice should be applied soothing and calming, like a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water.
then the patient should be placed on their back, and a layer of wool cloth equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be put underneath, then the nurse should place their thumb under the shoulder blade and lift it virtuously, and pull the patient's hand.
and another minister should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards. the shoulder comes back immediately, and if you see that you reset it in this manner:
and that you make someone larger than the patient to be present. and place the right shoulder directly under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in it. and another assistant draws the patient's hand down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then he can carry with him something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And reset it in another way:
and there's a long poker in the earth, whose head is as hot as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small. then it should be placed under the patient, but only if he has fallen asleep on top, and the patient is lying along the length of the wood.
then stretch out his hand downward from the other side, and the joints will return to their place quickly.
and if it doesn't want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: Take I a tallow from two arms of great and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded so that it may fit to enter deeply under the armpit, according to this form:
Then place it on top of the wooden beam draped under, so that the wood does not wound the patient, then put it underneath the armpit of the patient;
And stretch my arm on top of the long wooden beam, and place the aid on top of the beam, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one shoulder of an easel wide, and let the hands hang down below, and leave the body hanging from the other side: The joints now relax.
And when it is so, no matter what way it may be, then you should put under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere equal in size, then apply the plaster with powder of the mill, with incense and a little egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then hold it under the shoulder blade gently, and turn the lien on the plaster, and wrap the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he stays still a little while the limbs are comforted, for he will heal more quickly;
and then stay still for four or seven days, and then move him; and if he is firm and is not softened, it is sound.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in or for another reason, then you must apply cauterization to three parts, as it is written before this chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and he loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm above, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened. and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the breast, and shoulders, or behind, is caused by force, stretching of hands, and another kind of handling.
and treat him until he is sound.
And if after healing comes grief and tardiness of movement in the limb, then the patient should bathe many times until that grief is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated to points and returns to points;
and it is dislocated in all parts, and just as much before and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, because one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each shape. And when you join the sick limb with sound, you can then see clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as an abscess forms, for if an abscess forms, it would be a great difficulty to reset it.
and by chance it cannot be completely reset from top to bottom, especially when it is at the back. it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance many die.
And the restoration is such that when it can be reset as is, you stretch out his hand with your two hands. and his arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut all around, above and below, and bind the jointure to his back together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and sets the shoulder that is dislocated back to its root.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong stretching;
and it is that two ministers stretch out the arm, and hold it steady with two ministers, so that it does not move in extension;
then turn the arm on each side, then having enveloped a cloth double long and wide;
and when the surgeon joins the joint to her hand, so anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then bends the joint firmly until it recovers;
and when it is in place, so applies dry plaster with some egg, and holds it firmly, and places the arm on the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, so releases the bandage and lets it be;
and if you see that the joint does not hold well, so repeat the plaster and bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then loose.
And if the patient feels stiffness after repositioning the joint, and it seems to move, then bathe and gently rub well, and press until the pain is alleviated. Or you put a layer of fatty sheep's wool on the joint, then let it stay for a day and a night, then remove it, and cause it to enter into a bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter into a bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed.
and if you see that, put on a moist wheat poultice warmed with butter, and strain it on;
so he will return to his normal condition.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the recovery is light, more than other joints. Toutevoie, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same time that it is dislocated, so that the flesh may be swollen or a warm abscess may come.
And the remedy is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the middle fingers, and place the thumb equal, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the jointure, and push until it regains.
However, it is necessary to check if it is well in place; Then put the sick person's hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back on their hand on the table, and the physician puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. But if not, then apply soothing poultices to warm abscesses, and let it be so that it does not start again.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, then the twisted joint remains.
and nothing should harm the patient except as long as his hands are softened, and he cannot grasp anything at all. then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries;
if there is no other remedy except to draw out by fire cauterization around the case, and by chance it is not worth anything else.
And when his hands are back in place, then put on the ointment that we have said, then strain and leave it for five days, then release it and let it be so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then soak it in hot water and rub it until it is clean.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Some times the two bones of the hand are separated on each side, some times in the back of the palm or the belly.
then straighten the two bones and push the dislocation into your pockets until it recedes, then support the head of the bone and pull it towards the part where it is separated.
and leave it for two days, and then put it back in its place that day.
and bind it with a nut, as we have said, and loosen the tie of yesterday, and make it move, and rebind it to the nut;
and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same thing, if it becomes dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do just as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same thing, when it becomes dislocated on the other side.
of the dislocation of the sciatic nerve of the back
When the sciatic nerve of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations jump beyond natural sense, nor can they be held, and many times some limb is softened, or both hips or two arms or one.
And often the shinbone bends into four parts;
that which bends at the back is called "gilbositez";
the cure is that you reward if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no care or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, say the old methods of cures by great words, where there is no true benefit at all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the liver before, there is no understanding or health;
and also that which comes directly in both sides, and one can only cure fevers by the proper one that comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched on his face in one position and have a strap underneath him, so he does not get hurt;
then insert a firebrand into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and bind a band around the joints of the patient, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and two ministers know the bonds, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two fires;
and be well closed, the fire as we have said, and the mirror puts its palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it doesn't recover with this treatment, then take a three-branched stick of length, and hollow out the appearance below, and the patient should be in position, and push the head of the stick into the appearance, then place the middle of the stick on the spine. and put the mirror's feet on the other head of the stick, and press well, until it recovers to its place;
and if you see, then do it to the twisting one who twists with the hand. And it is that you put two fires on the head of the patient, one arm's length away, and towards the feet, two others, and have between each fire, a palm-breadth apart.
and have a small pit in each coal, where the core runs through, and let the coals be firmly on the ground, so they do not move;
and between each pair of coals let there be one coal turning, on which the core turns, and have in each turning two small coals a palm's length long, so that the core may turn;
and then tie the cord that is among the assemblers to the core towards the head, and the other cord to another core towards the feet, and each of the attendants turns his core to all the cord, and the master sets the spine equal just as we have said.
And when it is equal, then place upon it a drying plaster with an abundance of egg white, and then bind it, and then take the knife of three fingerbreadths in length to open up the joint and the part of the spine so that the bone may heal, then tie it with a cord just as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient until they are healed.
and if no thing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the steel that we have said before. and sometimes when one administers a splint, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower back of the spine of the back, and it is thought to be dislocation; and that's the bone which opens, so one should not have presumption there; in case it would bring about death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come forth with dislocations alone, nor does it come so with other joints;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated into four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and even more inside, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of his dislocation is that when one joins the sick leg with a healthy one, it is longer, and the sick person's knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot double their knee at the fire; and it is the swelling that is below an abscess, hot, because the inflammation of the crotch comes there.
The sign of him to whom it comes to an end is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of him who has it in front, is that his leg is well-shaped according to its fulfillment; nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the inguinal area, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and there is a swelling on the hip at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you reward if the dislocation is ancient and it stays according to its condition, if there is no care. and it is not necessary that he has presumption.
And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's of four kinds of dislocation, if you hurry to move the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for another treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, then you must make the minister strong, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one strap that is tied above the knee. and another minister stretches his hand on top in the same way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft strap above the hip. and another tightens the head of the strap;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains suspended.
This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If so, then it is necessary to apply treatment to its likeness.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, then you must take care of the patient on their chest side, then place the ligament on the root of the crotch, and the bone that is below the armpit, then stretch the ligament up towards the armpit and towards the flank.
then take other attendants by their arms, and encircle the thick bone of the patient's crotch, and stretch it out strongly. so it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligament on both heels and both knees, and let the sick leg be stretched out two doits more than the others.
Then let it hang on the top of a pole, and let two long arms stretch out over the ground.
Then instruct the minister to wrap the top of the groin, and let another minister stand with the patient, wrapping the groin tightly, because the joints are returning quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at the end, let the patient lie down as we have said in those with gilboesite, and stretch the bandage over the afflicted leg properly, and also on the back.
Then place two torches, one at the head and another at the back, then insert the torch between the patient's thighs in the shape. and let wet cloths be placed around them so the patient does not get hurt, then each minister stretches towards him, and the doctor puts an equal weight in his hand to the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, put on the bed, and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and place the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is before, it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I said; and place the mirrors so that their weight is on the sick angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in back, it is not necessary to extend the sick leg downwards or lift it up to the earth, rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated in back, as we have said about the posture on both hips; and be above its face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be adjusted when the patient stretches their legs, and they will be equal. then adjust the hips, and apply an ointment, and tie with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and then rest for three days or four, and afterwards loosen it, and put the plaster on.
and if you see that they are even, then strain it, as before, and let it be for three days.
then loosen it, and make him walk gently, until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The jaw is dislocated according to three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind.
and do not dislocate in front.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not bend to his hip, know that he is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet.
Then take his knee to your palms, and bring it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply. and another attendant stretches out his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has eased his leg slightly at the hip.
and put plaster on top, and make the leg settle at the hip, and keep it together firmly for three or four days, then loosen.
and do not trouble the patient to get up, until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limb is not straight, then extend it strongly, as we have said in the treatment of gout, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes strained, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inward and outward.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tense ahead of the part where it is dislocated:
the return is gentle, and one must stretch it gently with his hands when he is merely stretched.
And when it is dislocated entirely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and one attendant hold him forth except by the leg, above the ankle.
Then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand two times, then stretch it up, and put the foot beautifully up.
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot.
if it returns, that's good;
if not, then start the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return like this, then make the patient sit on the ground on his back, and place one pillow firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloth around, so that the patient is not harmed;
then take hold of the thigh by the attendants, and another attendant stretches the foot to their hands or to a cord that they tie around the calf of the foot; then stretch each attendant equally, and the cord should be placed between the thighs of the patient to retain the patient when one stretches;
Then place the mirrors equal to the dislocation in their hands, and other attendants take hold of the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is fixed, then place the plaster and bandages on top, and form straps, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch out for those nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligament is not too tight.
Then leave it two days or three, and if the ligament loosens, then loosen the straps;
Then release it on the third day or the fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he goes before that term is reached, it's not a guarantee that it won't dislocate again.
And if abscesses come to this, then it is necessary that you ease them, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
knees When the knees are dislocated, then they should be well stretched without labor, and that is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the heel or foot, then it's necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a one-piece table straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
and when it is equal, and nothing appears, then place a two-legged stool under the heel of the foot, then strain together, and leave it for three days, then release. and make him rest until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and one tries to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not humble in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and slow, nor hasty;
and use soothing things on the abscess first, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the abscess may live and not become worse;
and when the member is at rest, administer soothing things to the abscess hot, and cure the wound as it needs, with anointed dried substances;
and if there is a break with the dislocation, and small bones disconnected, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and take care not to enter into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth moving according to your Creator, and by the knowledge of your armor and body.
