Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the treatise of Al-Bucayashi .
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O son, I give you this book, which is the last of medical science; its completion brings me great joy. With its explanations and descriptions, it is clear that I have fulfilled my task in writing this treatise, which is a supplement to surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For although the operation of maiming is laid out in our region and at our time entirely deprived, yet it is a very dangerous science; and the evidence of it remains; but a few small descriptions are found in the books of the Ancients, which change their intentions and put them into error and confusion, because they are closed and lengthy in their reasons and the force of them and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I have brought life to this treatise with the second order of its exposition and description and brevity; and for it to come to the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of the operation by means of addition to the description, and for preparation of it, which is necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause why a good surgeon does not exist in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and because before he exercises himself in the science of anatomy which covers Gualia, for he knows the growth of the members and their shapes, and the joint and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of them, and the structure of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their sensation.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this I say that the name of Hippocrates, which is by itself, is enough in the small work, and more so in the art of maiming.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; for who does not know that I have told you about anatomy, it is not evident that he will fall into error by which men will die; so many errors have been found in this science and taken from that other science and those experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a doctor look at an apple and find an abscess in the neck of a woman; and he hit some of the arteries in the neck with a needle, so that blood flowed out in large amounts from her neck, causing her to die among many others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who said that he would drink a draught of a man who had fallen sick; and the draught was large, and he drank it, and cut off a piece of his bladder, causing that man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called it to mind that because of the large size of the draught and the state of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from our duke for surgery; and he was about to break a hernia on his chest, but because of his ignorance he broke it over the skin, using ashes and straws to strengthen the fracture, and left the skin unhealed.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then he followed his own desires and his god, and left it unhealed for several days and commanded that we cut the lien; and so, within those days, the hernia in the foot broke out and came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I have been called to do it, and I prepared myself to cut the lien, and when it was done there was peace and comfort for his sufferings.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption had already set in the member, so that I could not stop it; and it did not cease to walk until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer, and it became ulcerated near the skin after a few days; then the malignancy of it spread to its master.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	For the reason that the cancer cauterized is pure of melancholic humor; otherwise it does not remain in its place, but goes to another member than that on which you suffer, so that it becomes a source of all suffering.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, son, it is necessary for you that the operation of maiming be divided into two operations: one in which health is associated with it, and another work by which danger is incurred in the main dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already examined this book completely in every place where it involves an operation of error and fear; therefore, you must keep this book away from your eyes and not allow it to be read, so that its pages do not turn your way and distract you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection from God, and your ailments to facilitate and fortitude.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through God's grace to achieve salvation and worthy succession; leave behind you terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and hold your weapons away from those who cause you fear, so that you do not falter in your faith and do not abandon your name: for more remains to be done by you out of love, and further on to the end of your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia has already said in some of his motivational quotes:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not offend a doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is organized by chapters; in the forms of instruments and tools of cautery, and from which it is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part:
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of incision and perforation, and of vacuums, and of clouds, and of extracts of arrows and similar things, completely organized by the shapes of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part:
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and displacement, and of cure for twists and similar things; a chapter organized by chapters; in the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of fire cautery and of acute medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point, I begin the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will tell you the quality of those who perform cauterization and those who are unsuitable for it, and in which combination it should be done.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and the unsuitability of it is long and tedious, and subtle by science, and hidden away; and there is much wisdom in it, and I have enough of their disagreements, and I am satisfied with a little of their speeches, fearing repetition.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization is done in every combination universally; which is either of one matter or of two matters, except for two combinations, which are combinations of the tail of two matters.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the combination of tail and dry matter, they disagree; for some say that cauterization is appropriate to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not convenient in a dry disease, which by nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inappropriate is that the tail and the dry water should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite, that by cauterization is done good in all tail and dry diseases which are found in the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the combination of fire, you find the bodies of men burned up.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by that speech of him, which experience have I had several times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Yet I do not see that this has come upon him who is already exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by latter exercise, and he knows the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complexions, however, there is no fear on your part, and most importantly in the wet diseases, since all doctors have agreed upon those, and they have not disagreed in the juvenile exercise by cauterizing them at those times.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire cauterization and of the goodness of it, only by fire are burned, since the force of it does not reach another member except with slight injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The force of the burning medicine reaches that in the member which is blistered, and strongly causes a painful inflammation in the sick member, which is difficult to cure, and strongly causes an unpleasant smell.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, for its smallness and for the goodness of its substance, does not hurt except when it is superfluous; And we have already known by experience and by long service to study about the truth of causes; and so I am excused from the length of speech and if it were not that it is not read at my free will in this pause to you hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it on the bodies and of its expulsion by which the diseases are expelled, with philosophical demonstrative words, which would be improved in your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that the seasons do not agree on the time when it is convenient to make fire-cauterization and pause for the best time in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times so that the injury of time by accident is immersed in the youth of those who are drawn by cauterization, and most importantly if cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strongly and painfully, which do not suffer delay so that they are feared from those that come with a malice, which is greater than slight injury entered by time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And then they do not understand in your ears, or children, this is considered by the common people and foolish doctors; for it is that disease which is cured by fire at all times, and pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not good then what they consider by water, for fire is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause from which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But fire is superfluous over medicine because of the virtue and effectiveness of its operation, and the greatness of its Lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease return in some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it, and that it is prepared in his body from the addition of the superfluities in it, and that which comes to him in his acquisition in foods and resembling those causes; but if the disease by which cauterization was administered is a subtle disease in one member of few superfluities and humidities, then fire of teeth with pain and resembling that, it is possible that in him it does not return that pain, but instead it comes there.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And yet the vulgar speech is that fire is the last medicine, and it is a hasty speech, not to those who understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause, except by fire.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is opposite to that; and I believe that fire is the last medicine, it is only when we administer the ways of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit him, and at the end of the cause we administer fire to him, and benefit from it at that time.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Then from here I understand that fire is the last medicine, not according to the understanding which I have of the common people and the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the fools said that fire on gold is better than fire on iron, and they did not say it except for the equality of gold and for the smallness of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of fire does not burn up, unless absolutely vertat, for I have seen it and turned away from it; but you make fire on gold, which is good and better than iron, as the fools say; but when you make fire on gold, it is not revealed to you, because it is equal according to the quantity that you want to make rough of the gold, and because it prepares to receive it; and if you place it over fire, gold melts by the fire, and case in the fire some plates so that the artifice sees them for the occupation of it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And to make fire on iron you must place it gently and carefully on the right side of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this chapter on fire according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the book within the book so that you ask what you want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On fire by pain in the head due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to humidity and cold a servile accident of which there are two causes, so is the cause of sodium and many fluxes rheumatic, called rigor, from the head to the parts of the body and from the ears flowing, and much sleep, and toothache and gurgling, and generally all diseases that come by cold; then paralyticly, with sodium and apoplexy, and resembling those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with lacative medicine in his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the disease and its age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head, and then he will sit between your legs on a bench laid down, and place your hands over his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor of your palm on top of the razor of his nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But, however, when the patient says that this place is reached, mark that place by testing, and then burn fire on it from which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then you turn that place by testing, in such a way that the patient's hand be restrained little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see already any quantity of hair, as well as the amount of gravel in it, then raise your hand, and if it does not return to that iron, take another from that, if it is cold, until it is seen that bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause the ring in water wrapped in the bandage and leave it there until it is destroyed by the fire's heat.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that place with four-part farmacon ointment so that it is cured.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that as much as the plague of Rome brings, so many cure with ease; because it is better and more pleasant.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that some of them say that the cartilage should be cauterized within the bone, and that a part of the bone's structure should be burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it is shaved that which is close to the bone, and then it is cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they said to him that he let the cautery reach the end, until it enters the strong bone instead of making it break, and this is the form of small alpecat.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that place to exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then heal it before it is solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But for me these two kinds of cauterizations are not seen, but in some cases out of fear; and it seems to me that this is better for salvation when it is done, because the head is separated by solution from the rest of the body, and even more so when the patient's head is naturally freaked.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cauterization is better saved and seems to me more beneficial; and of those two, I prefer this one for salvation.
Capitol segon.	Capital second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the head's cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in total the head causes chronic and long pain, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of plasters and poultices and enemas and embalmings and calms and balms and salves, and above all if it has already been cauterized with a cauldron that it tells and does not benefit from any of those causes, then consider that since the head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not freaked and turns the head, then that head should be cauterized with another cauldron, little by little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then he cauterizes that on the edge of his hair on the head with a cauldron until the hair is burned.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incis the hair and expose it to the bone, the amount that we have counted, then cauterize that with a cauldron in the back of the head in the place called vasa, — and this is the place where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And praise your hand in such a way that you do not expose the bone, because by water the patient suffers a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And this cauterization is done in its place, for since the head' s hair and forehead are easier to cauterize than that which is at the top of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Capital third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of a migraine not ancient.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the back of the head hurts hard, or there is pain within the ear, let the head be cleansed with medicines, and another treatment that I have mentioned in the seven causes of illnesses; and if it does not benefit, then cauterize it with two methods: either with a burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But to cauterize with a burning medicine is better than to take an ointment from olive oil and to rub both ends of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the place that hurts on the temple with a sharp knife until it enters the flesh, and then cover it so that the hair is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then put pressure on it with a strong constriction, and let it be for three hours; then remove the ointment from olive oil, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then cover it with bandages soaked in water until the place swells up.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with unguent until it is cured.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see this, make some of the burning medicines that I have written in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization with iron according to this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	is called a nail, because the head is thus shaped in one place like a nail, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand on the painful place, and rotate the iron little by little at high speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is drained by the incision at the back of the hair is almost half of it, and then raise your hand so that the artery not be drained which is left, so that there is no flow of blood from it.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the wound in salt water and place it on the place, and let it rest for three days; then remove the bandages that are soaked in water, and heal with unguent until it is cured.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see this, cauterize at the end of the knife according to cauterization, and do not make an incision of the artery in this migraine not ancient.
Capitol quart.	Capital fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of a migraine ancient.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you heal a migraine with water that we have mentioned in the treatment preceding this one, and with water that we have mentioned in the seven causes of illnesses, and if this treatment does not benefit; and more because of the illness for which we have mentioned the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then consider that you ignite the cauterizing knife so that it is whiteened, because it indicates the place of pain on a line of length that is almost half of it, or that one; and then rest your hand by turning it for a moment, and then rotate the iron very fast.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must take care not to damage the continuing mandible, which is important for chewing, and that the tongue is not drained and the nerve is not damaged, and that it does not become entangled in a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if you are careful to prevent the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut off, because in cutting it there is danger, and more so at those who do not know what they are doing and do not study beforehand; and then leave the operation in a place where it begins.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to mind of the memory of the rule for preventing accidental flow of blood from the iron according to your way, in your place of this freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If this illness does not benefit from this cauterization and tolerates the piercing of the hair, then cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have counted, and heal the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see this, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in the first part of the iron treatment with two knives, and this is the best cauterization and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Capital fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear and it is treated with lacative medicines and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division of causes, and if the pain does not return; then burn the cauterization, and this is the one that has no points, which is called:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the point near the ignition, and direct it towards the entire ear as if it were rotating, or in the circle of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the cauterization of the ear tip slowly little by little, and then place your hand on that place to prevent pain from spreading.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization of it is made with points all over the ear, and this is it, then heal the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capital sixth.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torture that is cured and the cauterization is not except for the kinds of medicine that comes by blood.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the kind that causes dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you heal that kind of torture with jerks and purifications and gurglements, and if your treatment does not benefit; then consider that you cauterize the patient from three directions: the first is the tip of the ear, the second is a small piece from the temple, and the third is the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place the small cautery against the opposite side of the hernia, for healing does not occur except in the area that is sore.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize the small cautery against the right side of the earlobe by placing a small piece on top of the ear, and in the opposite one, its length being according to the length of the said foot, and pause your hand cauterized until it is burned the amount of the bulk of the wound of the skin.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and is especially made of a knife, the shape of which is placed in front.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However it is better that you place a little more of the knife; and cover with a thin layer of grease a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the area carefully before treating it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of Cauterization for Old Stroke.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When an old stroke has occurred and you have already used the water (which we have mentioned) and do not give it medicine and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize with four cauteries: on all the ears of his head; and on the top of his head, as well as the place that is sore; and on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way of the cautery is done according to what we have said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Then it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and there is a delay; and then clean those areas that have been cauterized.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of Cauterization for Oblique Wounds Made with a Flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover the patient in the beginning with large sheets and provide him with water to drink.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the head of the patient completely, and place a plaster on his forehead, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place some small needles, for that is a way of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then give water according to the measure which we have mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if by that it is healed well, then do not do anything; but if no, then place three cauteries on the back of his head, which are placed from the top of the head, over the left side, within the space between the two ears.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then place the thickness of the knife between each cauterization; and then clean the cauterization with water which has been prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if the patient consumes water, then place the cautery in the middle; and if he consumes more, then cauterize on either side.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then clean those areas that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the form which we have mentioned.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover the head with a moist cloth and give water to drink as we have mentioned; and then shave the head of the patient, and place the cautery in the middle of his forehead, and on all the ears of his head, and on the back of his neck, and on the nape; and place three cauteries on the joints of his neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of the patient and that the patients are tolerating it and the softening is strong, then cauterize with four cauteries on the joints of his arms, and continuously clean the area with the intent of burning it off, and hold your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then clean those areas that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of Cauterization for Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized with the epileptic one unless it is due to a flame.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Then cover the patient's brain at the beginning of his illness with a moist cloth and with another cure which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is ill and tolerates the experience of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	Then if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gruels and chewing tablets, in front of water for three days, with the benefit of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient and place a cautery in the middle of his forehead as we have described before; and another cautery on the top of his head, and on each ear of his head; and let him be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	Then if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize with the following: on the joints of his neck, and on the joints of his arms, and on the joints of his legs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Then let the cauterization be olive oil according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then place a little cautery in this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of Cauterization for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and a thick flame, then cauterize with the following: with the cauterization which we have mentioned in case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	Then if the cause of melancholy is flowing towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist with water, then give water to drink which covers the brain according to that which we have mentioned in the division: "When the patient is ill and tolerates the experience of medicines."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and place a little torch on his forehead gently; then pause it in the middle of his forehead.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Then the patient is seventy years old, and let him be held by all his parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause the linenment; and it is more fitting for a shepherdess.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Then scald with fire in moderate heat according to measure, which the patient endures when he is half-naked.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then blow on him in the middle of his forehead gently and let him cool down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Then give water to the patient once a week; or, if you prefer, cauterize with small points according to his age, but let your hand be careful: this is especially good for softening the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then pause the linenment that has been prepared in blue or gray wool.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of Cauterization for Water Descending on the Throat.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared at the beginning that water descends in the throat through the nerves which we have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient water which covers his forehead, and keep what has been said before.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Then place a little vinegar in a bath prepared with cold water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to shave his forehead, and cauterize with a cautery in the middle of his forehead; and cauterize with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water descending in two throats, or on the one temple if it is the beginning of water descending in one throat.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Then place a cautery on all the veins and arterioles which are left uncovered by the skin; and place those cauterizations at a distance from the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Then take care not to cauterize in the presence of blood, but if you do, then there is no harm; or else give some medicine, which may be necessary.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Then I come with sweetness that is extracted from arterioles and the absence of those, and take care not to be in the presence of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Then sometimes it is cauterized in the throat between two bones with two cauterizations constantly produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient, flowing strongly through the veins and arteries that go up to the head, and it is seen that this is superfluous fluid, then cauterize the part with fire, which we have mentioned in the beginning of water droplets dropping into the eyes, and fire cauterizing at the top of the head, and two cauterizations on the temple, and two cauterizations on the neck between the two temples, and two cauterizations on the neck between the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is an addition, then cauterize that in all depth of the hole of the eye on the extreme end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of a bad smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you give the patient three cups of wine; then shave his head, and cauterize half with fire, and half with olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clavus cautery on the two temples, leaving the hair between them small.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from fire so that it does not burn that out.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the cauterization with a clavo, this is the way.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter.xv.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization of the membrane of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a fire shaped like the moon; and this is the way to do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to, then cauterize that on the two temples with a small fire, and let them be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And have the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dry.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter.xvi.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs are converted to dust and hold the eye closed.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are converted to dust and hold the eye closed, then cauterize that in two ways, for cauterization is either by fire or by burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you want to do a fire cauterization, then order the patient in front of you that he does not blink his eyes, so that they are stretched and fixed; and if you hold him with one hand, then your hand should be strong enough that he does not blink, but his eyelids should be completely closed.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, with the eyelids completely closed and fixed, place the head of the patient in your lap, and put a cloth on it, with one corner over his eyes, so that the corner does not touch his eyelids; then start the timer from when you put your hand on his eyelid, and count according to the figure of a sword-play, and this is the beginning of the count next to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, over his eyebrows.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then light the fire for cauterization, and this is the way to do it:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the figure according to which you have counted, little by little, until the surface of the eyelid is completely burned with a clavo, all appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health of this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already tightened, and the hairs of the eye already raised from the edge of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and hold it over it for three days, and put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, every day.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment, so that it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for some reason and hold his eyelid closed, then do the cauterization again all at once.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid itself, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and fixed, and so that the hairs do not hold the eye closed.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterization by burning medicine is this: tell the patient to blink his eyes until they are stretched and fixed, then put a cloth on it with one corner over his eyes, so that the corner does not touch his eyelids; then start the timer from when you put your hand on his eyelid, and count according to the figure of a sword-play, and this is the beginning of the count next to the hairs.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a sharp knife and cut off the hair with a lively stroke. Chapter i. Take those things together and mix them well, so that they are not chilled; and then spread the mixture on the cloth in the form of a sword-play, and put it on the patient's head, and hold the knife above it, ready to strike. Then take a sharp knife and cut off the hair with a lively stroke.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then put those things in the patient' mouth, and press it lightly on his teeth, so that he feels the burn of the medicine, for that burn is in his mouth as fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then when he feels the burn of the medicine in his mouth, then let him spit it out and wash his throat with water; and if the eyelid has been raised already with the burn or cut, then you have done well; but if it does not raise, then repeat the operation and see that the eye does not become inflamed because of the medicine.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, over the edge of the eyelid, so that it is completely removed, and then treat that with ointment, whether it heals by itself or with another medicine, so that it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to be vigilant in your operation so that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid is swollen because of the hairs, then repeat your operation on that place where the eyelid is swollen, and exactly as it starts, put the medicine where it is swollen; and then turn yourself, and see that the place where you have put the medicine heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way of a sword-play.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the eyes of men are different, according to their size and age, and so your operation should be adjusted to each eye.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not forget the way of treating those who have been operated on before in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter.xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the eye's eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the medicine that we have mentioned in the division of the eyelids and do not apply your treatment, then cover that you cauterize that according to this way: tell the patient to place his head between your shoulders so that he does not blink or move his head; and if there is anyone who can hold him, so much the better.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then put a cloth on it, wet with milk or vinegar, over his eyebrows.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the fire for cauterization, and this is the way to do it:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	with one end in the form of a cane or a feather of a bird, from one end which is made to be cauterized.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see it, let it go into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out so try.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But certainly that which is constipated is better for the work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out and dry up its matter.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open that and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place over it the cautery which is well ignited, and touch lightly your hand or the patient's nose at the beginning of the nose, so that your hand or their hand does not shake, and then place the cautery on the furrows of the nose and burn them.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the burn the skin blisters, it is good; and if not, then repeat the burn one or two times, if necessary; and leave it there for three days, and then place over that wound a poultice made with salt and water until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has not healed after eleven days, then place over it an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you believe is best in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of burning a fistula, which the first doctors said: "Go to the place of the fistula and pour in it a small quantity of molten lead; and if your hand is well protected, so that the molten lead does not reach the nose of the patient; then cover that with a thin layer of plaster, either made from the blood of a horse or water, because lead clings to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful remedy.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the water that I said about the burn and the cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a trauch of the nose and to reduce the fistula to its own place according to what comes in its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the Burning of a Wound with Lead.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	It happens that blisters occur in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those sores with the water that we have said in the divisions and do not profit from our cure, then ignite the small scalpel according to this form which is made thus:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place it carefully in those sores so that the burn reaches the edge of the sores.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with a sharp knife so that it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the Burning of a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth the aphum is made, and it is broken, and it is hardened, and it is corroding, and there is a fistula; then you cure that and do not profit from our cure, then place over that where the burn has entered the fistula, and then ignite your cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place it ignited on the edge of the fistula, and at its other end make a blister one or two times; and then cure it with water that we have said for the cure so that it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing is broken and it heals, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and burn the bone according to what you believe is best in its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the Burning of Teeth and Softening of the Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are hurt, then cure those with medicines and do not confer with me, then place the cap of the mallet on the head, and then ignite your cautery quickly according to its form; then, without taking your hand away from the patient' s jaw, place the tip of the cauterizing knife at the root of the tooth and burn it very quickly, so that the heat of the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then take your hand away, and repeat the burn a few times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the mallet should hold a mouthful of saltwater and keep it for an hour; then drink that, because the hurt tooth is closed and the softened gum is hardened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the Burning of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to cold or there is a burning or stinging sensation, and you do not confer with medicine the cure, then the burn in that place according to two ways: either by burning with cow's blood, or by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Burning with a cow' s blood is that you take the cow' s blood and boil it in an iron pot, and then place a bandage and wrap it over the end of the tooth, and quickly place the burned blood on the tooth according to the form that has been boiled; then place that on the painful tooth so that it cools.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat the burned blood a few times according to the power of the fire reaching the roots of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, dip wool or a bandage in the cow' s blood, and place that on the tooth, and place an iron burned one according to what reaches the edge of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But certainly the burning according to fire is that you take the whetstone of steel or an iron, and it is sharp and does not reach the edge of the cavity of the tooth, and the acute power of the fire does not reach the patient' s mouth; for such things do not help in healing.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then ignite your cautery according to its form, and place that on the tooth and your hand within so that the burn cools; and make a blister in some places because the pain returns or on that day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And then, because of the impression of that burn which the mallet should hold its mouth with good cover and keep it for an hour and then drink it; and this is the form of the burn.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And burn the end according to what you see necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the Burning of an Extrophyl.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When an extrophyl is made of fluid and frigid humors that do not submit to medicine through digestion, and you see the digestion of those a little, then ignite your cauterizing knife according to this form which has two open ends so that the smoke from the fire reaches the other end, and place that burned one on the abscess once, and if it is desired, place that within so that it reaches the edge of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is a little, then place the burn according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place over that on a bandage in good cover so that it heals by the smoke from fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with oil and try it again and wrap it up, so that it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And this is the form of the tube or two burns; it is to be turned over.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the Burning of Scurvy and the Constriction of the Throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes on the throat of the lung, and mostly when water is due to cold weather, then it is necessary to evacuate the mallet at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then burn that where the tonsils are embedded in their place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And you should not apply to the throat of the lung or burn it with the cord of the larynx, but a little bit only.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Then cauterize it with another cautery, as the joint of the neck at the last spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery be made by the same way as was described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with the medicine that was mentioned before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the Cauterization of Pulmonary Maladies and Coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and pulmonary malady are caused by moisture, and there is no fever or consumption, but it is an old disease, then cauterize twice on the furcula in the place where the bones join together, and another cautery on the middle of the foot between two breasts; and let the cautery be made as was described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization may be made with the same pointed cautery that is called a point, the shape of which you have used in the cauterization of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then make points within those, and treat with medicine those that were mentioned before until they are healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And after having made the cauterization, there are three ramps for the cautery, which can be made in this way: first, make a ramp that is flat; then make another ramp that is pointed; and finally, make a ramp that is round.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the Cauterization of Tickling at the Tip of the Tongue.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by means of moist and oily substances, so that it does not return to its place at first, then reduce the dislocation, and then the malady returns to its place, then raise the finger which is in the mouth at the tip of the tongue; and then lower the same finger to the root of the tongue from above, by means of the fingers of your left hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then make two points on it, and this is the way of doing it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the tip within so that it enters one place and comes out another; and after having made three points on it, there will be a figure of cauterization, which is as follows:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and then the small one according to the quantity of trial; and this is the way of doing it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	In some cases it is made according to this count, and for that reason are made the following cauterizations. »xii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place over the cautery salt, and then make it adhere with quietness to the member, and do not cause it any pain until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at the tip and it returns, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is thickening and the malady is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is a flow of liquid and it multiplies in the stomach, and if you continue with the treatments and do not confirm it, then treat the malady, which is that the malady be on its back, and extend your hands over it, and then make three cauterizations: first, leave one finger on the foot for a quantity of a digit; second, make two cauterizations on either side of the finger, so that they form a triangular figure; then lengthen those which are not joined, so that they will split.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is according to the quantity of the third part of the thickness of the tip?
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the figure of cauterization according to this way. If you wish, cauterize with a great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this form is a circle according to this way:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach be cauterized by piercing that person who is frightened of cauterization: and this is to say that you feel a piercing sensation in your stomach according to the quantity that you wish, and then cauterize with another cautery in the place; and then treat with the treatment mentioned before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the Cauterization of a Fretted Instrument.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the instrument by cold or moisture or rough wind, and if it deviates from its normal state, then treat the malady with the medicine that we have mentioned, and do not confirm it; then, if the malady be on the back, place the patient's head between your knees, and feel a piercing sensation.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space between each cauterization according to the thickness of the digit, and be the cauterization according to the length of the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your hand with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is applied is according to half the thickness of the tip, and the malady be on the feet; and if it is not standing up, then place them down, which are already extended, and raise your feet.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is possible that you make these cauterizations with a knife-like cauterization, when it is subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And keep in mind that you do not over-process the cauterization, so that the thickness of the entire tip is uniform, and so that it reaches within the buds, because the tip here is delicate; and know how to control it.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the Perforation of a Fret on the Instrument by Piercing with a Cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or an abscess in the instrument, and you wish to know if it is in the meat of the instrument or in its sheath, then, if it is in the meat of the instrument, the malady will be heavy and there will be pain;
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the sheath of the instrument, the pain will be great and your treatments will not help the patient.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then, if the malady be on the back, place the patient' head between your knees; and feel for the location of the abscess by piercing; and then make the cauterization with the same shape that was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with it and with another cauterization, so that the entire tip is melted together, so that it reaches the cypher, so that it is healed when it is used.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat those others with the treatment mentioned before until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And I do not know if the form of cauterization that is used here is the one mentioned in the art of medicine and which has been prolonged; and likewise some cases, but then let it be left to experiment with this operation; however, let it be left to us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the Cauterization of Blisters.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The little cauterizations of the chirurgical blade to blister are made according to this way: and it is as follows what you take from the chirurgical blade that is long and dry, and is of the thickness of the digit.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then submerge that in oil and burn it with a flame, and then cauterize by means of a small cauterization at the place where the furcula joins with the neck; and another small cauterization to one side, declining a little from the beard, and another on the part which is inclined; and another small cauterization in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three small cauterizations in the parts which are inclined behind; and another small cauterization in the place between the two breasts, and two cauterizations on either side of the foot from above, declining a little to the sides.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not covet your neighbor's wife when you are using a sharp cautery, for it is un-Christian to lust after one's neighbor in such a way.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And also tell us tales of men who use a sharp cautery made like a ray and ignites it so that we may know if the blood clot will come off when we place it on that spot where the disease is, just as we have said in the case of the foot clot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May it be known that there is no fear in piercing with a sharp cautery, since often such things happen at the spot of the fistula, where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the melasa.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the melasa malady with water, as we have said in the division chapter, and do not confer the cure, then cauterize it in three ways or four according to its length: according to the shape of the cautery figures that preceded this one for the foot.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery be the thickness of a finger or less, and the shape of the cautery is the same as we have said in the cauterization of the foot, turning it.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not covet your neighbor's wife when you are using a sharp cautery; and the patient is lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is, when you hold the cautery with two hands, to ignite it, causing a fire as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raising the cord that is in the middle of the disease, this will burn the patient's sinew.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be the same as the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the flesh.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then put both hands on either side, ignite a fire, and place it between them so that the cord comes out on this side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; and there are four cauterizations to be made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see it, cauterize with three hands.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then cure the cautery placed there, for it is more convenient to cure it with fire than to wait for it to cool down; because it is more certain that other causes will precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of the hydropic disease.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in hydropic disease, but only in a third type of disease.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydropic disease with the methods of cure we have said in the division chapter, and do not confer the cure, then it is necessary that he cauterize with four cauterizations on the circuit of the womb, and one on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the melsa, and two between the spondils of the legs, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then let the cautery cool down so that it does not burn for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient with water after cure, so that they are not added to the two effluents, and the third is stirred with a helping hand for healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery that is used for cauterizing the stomach is square according to its previous form, and this is the one used for cauterizing the legs, which is olive-shaped according to what comes before it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter  .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are infected with hydropic disease and are swollen with clear water, it is necessary that you cauterize them between the second and third metatarsal bone with a sharp cautery, raising your hand with the cautery and not turning it; then return your hand to its original position, as the clear water will dissipate.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the second form of cauterization: And two cauterizations are made on each thigh, one at the end of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cauterization according to the length of the thigh, and do not return the hand to its original position; but, on the contrary, move your hand down to its usual place; and two cauterizations are made on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Then leave the wound uncovered for a long time so that no water is lost from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And cure according to those causes we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is clean with water and moistened inside so that it digests and retains, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with water according to the methods of cure we have said, and do not confer the cure; and sometimes patients suffer from cauterizations of the exhalent virtue, then cauterize them with a large cautery on the top of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a large cautery around the belly, and four cauterizations on the circuit of the small intestine, one with a square-shaped cautery; and a cauterization over the alcatins on the right side, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the patient's water is abundant and they can tolerate it, then cauterize them with a pentagonal shape on the top of the stomach and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the inguinas, for this is an excellent cure that does not leave any trace.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter   .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in nature the later stage of ancient hemorrhoids or a humor of thick water that infiltrates or corrupts with moisture, and they are cured with water according to the division chapter we have said, and do not confer the cure; then cauterize with three cauterizations on the lower spondil of the small leg, and a square-shaped cautery over the ombelica, cutting it in two parts by means of two cuts.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you perceive that the person' stomach is swollen and their food is not digested, and their face is swollen, then cauterize them on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and one on the foot, and another on the melsa with a square-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery in place for some time, and cure that which is inside.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter    .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cauterization of the atheyl close to the absence of it.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you separate atheyl, then ignite the cautery made like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place that ignited cautery inside the separated atheyl, and return your hand to the opening of the vein from which you can see the blood coming out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then make one or two cuts, for if the steps are three, then cauterize each one according to what we have said, and cure those with water so that they are not wet within, and this is how you treat them until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the right side, it is more likely to be followed by death.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are caused in the later stage in the division of the legs.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey to the work we have recommended at its place, and the patient is frightened by water, then he is healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is a fistula in nature behind, and it is ancient, I extract the corrupt wetness, and therefore that which is put into dignity that it should cover - that I try with subtle touch, and proportion the amount of its depth with the aforementioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then bring the cauterizer that seems like fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then set this cautery on fire in this fistula, and according to the amount in which it mixes with the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that cautery within which are burned those corrupted humors one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the channel of the bladder or into the channel of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not pour liquid there unless it is in a fleshy place and you think that it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the area within that it be healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and there are no matter separated from it, and it has been thus for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if those matters are not held back by it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the channel of its os corrumput, or it comes from those causes of which there will be recall in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization of the humors.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the humors due to cold or strong wind, and because of this the patient's coat becomes soiled, then cauterize that which causes the pain on the humors with a cautery that can be used for all the humors, and remember the memory of it.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	Then firmly cauterize with a small piece of wood so that three tiny scars will come out, and then they will heal quickly behind them.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter.xxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is pain in the bladder and softening due to cold or wetness, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize that which causes the pain on the posterior part of the bladder with a small piece of wood, where the hairs grow, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of hairs in the place; and cauterize that which causes the pain with a cautery in the posterior lower part of both, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let there be a cautery that can be used according to how it is treated.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the large intestine.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and wetness in the large intestine, and because of this there is a danger of pregnancy, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, and there is a delay in its occurrence, and pain arises when it moves, then cauterize that place with three cauteries on the path of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and on the posterior lower part of both, or two cauteries, and let there be a cautery that can be used.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter.xi.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the tongue.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is moist mucus spread on the part of the tongue, and it causes a feeling of sticking in its place, and it signals that the cough is prolonged when compared to the other, then know that it is due to cold.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the part of the tongue that is dislocated is turned towards the back of the throat.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then when you cauterize the patient' tongue on the part that is dislocated with a cautery that seems like fire, knowing that you will have to try in the path of this part as if it were rolled up, and so that the part falls into its normal place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let there be a cautery that precedes the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if you do not have such a cautery with you, then cauterize with three small cauteries on the large intestine.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let there be made according to the amount of severity in all the body; and then heal that part within which it should be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter.xi.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the tongue and it is due to cold and wetness, then the patient is given water that we have mentioned, and if it is old, then know that you lack the humors of the large intestine with spoiled pills or artificial pills or those that resemble them; and then cauterize that which causes the pain.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of cauterizing in that part is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And according to two proven ways, the first of which is that you cauterize that part on the back with three triangular cauteries according to this form, and let them have depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let there be space between each cautery the amount of the thickness of the wood or if it is small, then let the olive-sized cautery or large one be used.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some few times that cauterize on its normal place on top of the tongue so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, then cauterize with a circle that precedes the shape in the cauterization of the dislocation of the tongue, and let this circle be large enough to burn all the severity in all the body.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way of cauterizing in the case when pain adheres to the tongue and does not extend within the cushion.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended within the cushion, then cauterize that which causes the pain with two cauteries on the cushion over the part of the tongue that hurts, and let one cautery be placed over the joint by four small pieces; and in the middle of the tongue, place a cautery that can be used.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if you have a scalpel, and let the depth of the scalpel be according to the amount of severity in all the body.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is extended within the place of the tongue and it is a few pounds away from it, then cauterize that part where the patient feels it with three points or more, or as many as you need.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels that the pain is on one side of the tongue and it hurts when you touch it, then cauterize that part with a scalpel.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not use fire that damages nerves or causes great pain, and because of this your hand becomes injured or you die.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	You have already seen another of those that I cauterized on the tongue and I ended with cauterization, and the fire was inflamed within the patient' head, and it penetrated through the entire head.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a strong solution for the stomach came, and death followed soon after.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this way.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in the cauterization of the tongue, that this way is: make a circle of iron that its path is most of an inch; and it should be the length of a finger or two according to the thickness of a date fruit or the width of a fingernail.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within this circle, let there be another third circle; and let the distance between them be according to the amount of hairs in the palm of the hand; and may these circles be open from both sides; and this is the way of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then set fire to it at the tip so that it glows and is held over the area of the ankle, the mattress placed on top of the sheet.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then cauterize this with three pointed cauterizing tools in one stroke.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then leave it alone for three days; then apply ointment to the wound and leave it open for seven days; then heal this with poultice.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasius: O son, of this type of cauterization we have used little because of the danger of looking at it and for those few that we have found who look up at it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May he have fewer cauterizations than those who suffered from them, and turn away from him the place where he was.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May he have fewer cauterizations with medicinal oils than those who suffered from them, making two circles of a certain length on the skin, through which to pass the iron rod; let it be a long way from the edge of the wound in the direction of their hair.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each is the same quantity as the thickness of it; and are open on both sides, and hold themselves together in this way:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place the mattress over the area of the ankle, the patient lying down on top of it, and compress your hand on the area of the ankle; then take cold water between the two circles, and its quality should be little by little fire, and hold it for an hour quantity, and suffer the patient to feel the biting and heat of it—as if it were fire—until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand away from the tool and rinse off the cold water from all of the ankle.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then leave it alone for three days and place a poultice on top until the heat returns, then let it run cold; this is done after the third day.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal this with poultice until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends within the crotch or the leg, then make it into a shape that holds water according to how it is made on the ankle joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the way of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take from the alkali and from a certain plant a little at a time on each side; and twist them together in a new wave, through which the opening between them is pierced with a small hole, according to how much enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then leave the edge of the other wave wrapped up, and place that on top of the alkali and fresh water plant which is taken in little by little, and then compress those with your good hand; and leave the wave from which it comes to go away from it.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all of that water, and place another on top of it, fresh and new, because this one causes a sharp pain, which is administered in small doses as a medical procedure or to cauterize the other members, because it operates with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And from the medicines some that are cauterized widely, thus quickly and without delay, and a certain plant in which to soak it until they are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia reported about a man of the old ways on how to operate and heal the pain in his ankle and sciatic nerve, and he said that no further cure was needed, for it is healed by itself with time; for such a small thing has already been done to him.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It is because it has been taken from a certain plant that grows on the ground, and if it has not been turned into an oil, then take a fresh fig; and make three drops of it and place them on the ankle where the pain is, or in the crotch or on the leg, and leave it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Then leave it for three hours quantity or how much the patient feels heat.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put it in a bath and when the man's body is heated up, put that into the sun, for the pain stops and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You should know that there is nothing to be done with these medicines except for the elimination of the body's contents.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May he also say that when the vein of the goat is cut and cauterized with wool, it heals well; but if it is done in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the toenails.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry goat's skin and heat that with fire until it turns into charcoal; then place it over the wool and leave it until it is hardened.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat this water, and do not stop doing so until the biting stops reaching the ankle where the pain is; then pause it.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This way of cauterizing is called cauterization of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXXII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the treatment for pain of two parts.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are due to two causes, because of contact or rubbing, or because of excessive elimination, and because of similar things, by the infusion of dry matter and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	But cauterization does not occur except in this single specialty, which is done by the infusion of rubbing material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then, therefore, the elimination of the body's contents is done by pills that resemble them and are made in two parts, according to the location of the pain; then three lines of fire or more, depending on how much is tolerated by the patient and how useful it is for him.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	Then make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you want to, cauterize with three or four cauterizing tools in the form of a point:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of the treatment at the beginning of gingival disease.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some ways to treat this disease in small children; and indicate the beginning of it in them by observing when the teeth begin to move, raising their cheeks, and the movement of milk in them.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	It is noticeable at the back of the second spine and at the base of the neck, which has already begun to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Then, when you see this water and want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery is placed on the entire joint, wrapped around it.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you want to, cauterize in the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery made up of two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Then place the tips of these points next to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then heal that area where it hurts with water which we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May he also know that cauterization is not administered in gingival disease that is caused by muscle spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it gout itself.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Then how is gout cured by rubbing in the way of healing and not being reawakened with pain? Then it is properly cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize that by elimination in the circle of the joint of the foot with several cauterizing tools.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then it is an olive cautery, which has this form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If there is a need to make marks on the foot's sole, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains press down into the ankles or other joints, and this becomes worse, then cauterize each one of them with three or four cauterizations altogether, using this cautery as an olive.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you must cauterize in this way, then cauterize it and do not press too hard on the hand with the cautery, but rather only touch the skin of the foot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains press down into the sole of the foot and the arch, then administer the cautery that I have mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains only occur in the sole of the foot, and it is called "sweet uric acid," then make a point on the circuit of the fire thus: make a point between the two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in these parts, then make a point on the circuit of the fire on each finger and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains press down into the hips or thighs, then cauterize each one on all sides of the assistant.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient if he does not have good regulation and reception of medicines, for if it is done in this way and inflammation occurs, God helps it with this cauterization, may He be praised.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter. XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of Cauterization for Breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a hernia breaks in the groin and the intestines come out before the hernia, then return them to their place in the abdomen, and let the patient eat as usual and use milder food that does not cause inflammation of the wound.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your legs and order him to keep his belt on, so that it does not slip or come off, or the intestines or hernias appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return it to the patient with his legs together and touch the break on the bone at the top of the thigh, where it resembles the half-circle of the hip bones that are broken.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then light the cauterizer in this way:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	within which it is bright and produces sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then pause the cauterizer on that mark with your hand, holding it steady, and touch it to the bone at the top of the thigh within the middle of the hip, and repeat this second time if you did not succeed in the first touch within the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully during the time of the cauterization that you do not burn that intestine, so that it does not cause death or some great evil on the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that if you do not feel the bone, you have not performed the operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cauterizer of children should be subtle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then clean the place where you made the incision for three days, so that it does not become infected.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with the others in a timely manner, may it be healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient remain upright on his feet for 10 days, so that he does not move about or trouble himself, and that the wound remains closed and the plague does not spread.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should pause the patient’s food according to the length of time for his recovery, so that his belly does not ache and that the intestine is not burned because of the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then when you want to remove it after 10 days, administer it carefully and thoroughly, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him work and eat and drink well, and be zealous in observing this whole way of healing, for if you do so, it will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And direct the healing of breaks in other parts of the belly, and begin at the beginning, and let them not stop, then cauterize that break with a third cauterization according to the quantity, and so it is taken out of the foot when it comes off; and clean that with water as I have said, and do not hurry.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already they say that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular cauterizer according to this form, because it is marked in this way:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and the line that runs through its width under the break, and another line above it; and pause your hand with a nail, for the first cauterization is shorter and better done.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of Cauterization for Twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain twists the limbs through bedding or percussion, and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medication, then know that you should cauterize it with the point of a nail.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And know that the entire limb should be cauterized according to its size and age, and its virtue and urgency, and the location of the twisting and the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization; for it is usually because those pains are caused by punctures in that member near the body, so that you may heal those with a cauterization that does not cause death on the patient.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of Cauterization for Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leuks are healed by cauterization with great benefit, and others are not healed lightly if the specific type of leprosy is caused by the decay of fire and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then consider if you want to cauterize that person, whether the leprosy is caused by fire decay and melancholy, as I have said, and do not heal it with water that has been said, and do not heal it with a third cauterization: one on the top of the head in the middle location, and another after leaving it, touch the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two sides; and one behind, on the neck or servitor.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally touch your hand with a little bit of the cauterizer to give it strength, so that the exhaled vapor is removed from him; and cauterize it as soon as it is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and manifested itself clearly, then know that you should cauterize it with those cauterizations I have mentioned in the head; and one on the tip of the nose, and two on the ears, and two on the sides, and one behind, near the neck or servitor. And touch the top of the foot, and two on the toes, and two on the heels, and two on the calves, and two on the thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the knees, and one at the bottom of the knee, and one at the ankle, and one behind near the heel, and one in front of the foot.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from those nerves that are on the sole of the foot, which you should not burn.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some are cauterized with one cauterization on the bone at the top of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and one on the finger.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you administer cauterizations, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain in cauterization, as they do when cutting the hair, for the bodies of them have already become stuporous.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And because the cauterizations are big or few according to the members and joints according to that it is preceded of the spices of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the cauterization with flour of eruca, with honey, and with the other cure within that it is saned.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is stiffened or dormant and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that stiffened member according to whether it is large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Then may the little cauterization enter into the specificity of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with oil within that it is saned.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some veins are cauterized that which end to the most and to the feet, and to the spines of the two and of the feet the nerves which move that member, and is renewed the stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not advance over this but that which is wise in the anatomy of the members and of the exit of the nerves throughout all the body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter  .xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of Swellings that are Morphed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When swellings are old and do not conform to any of the medicine oils, then you should cauterize that with cauterization before a little according to the specificity of the wound within that it is renewed the whiteness and the color of it, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with flour of eruca and lentil, with rosin oil and leaves of arnica, and with sand of kolombangla or of yarrow, each a little and all mixed together, and may it be bound with a cloth over the area within that it is saned.
Capitol .l.	Chapter .l.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of Cranky.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is just beginning and you want to burn that star, then cauterize it with cauterization in the form of a circle on its orbit as soon as it has rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its place; but to me is not seen this, because I think that it is ulcerated, and already have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is also said that it should be cauterized in the orbit on its circle as mentioned above, or with a little cauterization.
Capitol .li.	Chapter  .li.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Adulterated.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adulterated is delayed in maturity, and so it becomes per the superfluitat fazen that one, or by age of the old man, because it is late in ripeness, or by time, and you want to hurry up on its maturity; then cauterize it in the orbit on a little pointed cauterization; and let go that one because it quickly matures.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the piercing of it with cauterization, then you should set that cauterization which is the shape of it: and let rest that one in its place of adulterated within that it enters the wound.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if that cauterization is placed in a place which is left behind, so that the cross of the arm is eased; and then cure that within that it is saned.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter   .ii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization of Corrosive.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is walking corruption in the member, which corrupts that one as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you burn that corrosive in a place which suffers from cauterization with fire, then you should set some little pointed cauterizations, and large according to what is convenient in that place in which it is corrosive.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that entirely within that you eradicate all the corrosion and do not affect any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let rest that for three days, and pause over the cauterized places wet-wet within that the scars are completely eradicated and all the corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then cure that with oil of rose.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if instead of the three days the flesh is born that is healthy and does not corrupt, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that one which is rotten in the places where it is corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is cured by some times with acute medicine, because that one is half in place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But therefore cauterization with fire is a lighter cure.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	Already have I said the cure of it by acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that one when you come to your end.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter   .liii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Claws and the Rest of the Semblants.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	There are some eyes that are placed in the tip of the foot that is called claw, and it is a gross cause, exit, which rubs the foot; and cauterize those according to two ways: if it is cauterized with fire, then cauterize it with tail water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cauterization as if it were turning back, which is made of iron according to its quantity that contains the claw entirely, and it is of subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then let rest that ignited on the claw, and then turn your hand around with the cauterization in its orbit within that the cauterization reaches to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let rest that for three days within that it begins to burn the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply that with dried-up hibiscus leaves minced with salt, and let rest the application on that for a night, because that one eradicates its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that place with oil of rose within that it is saned.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	But if it does not convert, and some eyes appear on the surface of the body, mainly on the hands and feet, then you should provide in that one a little amount of water-tail: and if it does not get, take a small amount of salt or of iron or of rust, and let rest that over the claw; and then pour in the tail-water a small quantity, and turn your hand around, and you should press that with the pressure of your hand from all sides, and should compress the margin of the tail-water tube at the root of the claw, and let return the tail-water pipe to where it came out from the root of the claw; and then wait for the old man a little of the biting of the tail-water within an hour, and then remove that, because the claw with its roots will erode.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then I prepared them so that the other can come in, completely surrounding all of their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those pustules that the claws of the animals have created by applying the ointment to those areas where the flesh has been affected.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When one has a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from a fever-like cause or from another similar cause, then it is necessary to cauterize four times on each side of the spine between each vertebra with a single cautery; and a cautery on the feet, and one on the abdomen.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And so the tremor of the patient will cease, and the healing of the fever-like disease will advance.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization for accidental white marks on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white marks appear on the body and pustules are formed by gross corrupted matter, then at the very beginning, when they appear, let them be cauterized with a subtle fire of the martinet, extending the end of it; or with a long-headed razor; or with a slow-burning cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge in this way; and they do not need to be bandaged, and the excess matter is dried up, and made healthy by doing so.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however, it is necessary that a fluid be evacuated with the help of a needle.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization for white blood that flows from an incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When there is a flow of blood from an incision of an artery that needs to be stopped, or from the removal of an aphematoma or a cauterization of the member, and in similar cases, it is difficult to repair them.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when you encounter blood, place your hand over the orifice of the artery, and pause it on that spot so that the blood does not flow out from under your hand.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place a few large and small olive-colored cauterizations on the spot, and exhale breath onto those spots where fire will light up;
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small or a large one according to the place and the wound where the artery has been broken, more quickly than you can repair it again, and apply cauterization onto that spot where it was broken;
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the artery's orifice when you release your hand and the cauterization is applied, then take another cauterization that has been prepared in the fire, and if you do not stop the flow of blood, put it onto another spot where the blood needs to be stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the flow of blood by narrowing it, and much so when the artery is large, unless in one of four ways: or if it is cauterized as mentioned above; or if it is removed when it is not removed, for when it is removed, the extremities of the patient are burned and the blood is narrowed, or if it is tied with a knot or a ligature by a strong tension, or if it is placed on medicine that its virtue is to narrow the blood flow; and they are tightened with the help of the pulse.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that which restricts the blood flow by means of a knot and by stricture placed on the pulse or due to similar causes that cause burning, does not benefit much.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if you come across something that is not the present medicine or remedy, then open the hand with which the bandage was applied to the wound as mentioned above, and understand that for the great constriction of the place where the blood needs to be stopped, and over the artery the word "do not touch" is not applied; and by pouring cold water onto it from a high temperature, so that the blood congeals and thickens; and in addition, you can burn the wound with fire or apply medicine as necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and of winds and of phlegm and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Avicenna's.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already mentioned in the first chapter all disease that benefits from fire cauterization and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments by which these forms of cauterization are applied; and we order the chapters of the subsidiary topics according to their places.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter according to that method, so that whatever is wanted may be found easily; then on this subject that has been mentioned, the following chapters will deal with its causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and prognosis.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	In advance of what we will begin here, be aware that in this chapter the following things are mentioned due to fear; for these things are mentioned in the first chapter of cauterization:
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for the following things, be aware that they are mentioned in this chapter due to caution; for in the operations mentioned in the previous chapter, there is the possibility of blood flowing from a vein or an incision on an aphemia or an excision of a growth or a scar or an incision with a knife and similar things:
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of them are accompanied by fear and tremor, and in addition to them is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it is not desirable for you to encounter this fear; for sometimes a person encounters the ways of men from hell because of the diseases mentioned in this chapter.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them are those who persist in their disease and die due to the severity of this disease, and because of the length of the patient's illness, and because of the fear of that disease for which death is a sign.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And that type of person is one who gives hope and promise to you, while his own disease is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore I do not agree with that person who sees you in this way; and your caution should be greater than your suspicion and your impatience; and do not assume any cause about this without a certain knowledge that will validate it for you, and to which the praise of God be given for its success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prediction and indication; for in that is given to you aid in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Or children, may God inspire you and not mislead you; for this faith is in your hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter differently according to the chapters that precede it in the chapter on cauterization; of the cure of the head within the body, so that whatever you want may be found easily from here and whatever you needed has been provided for you.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease appears in children when the brain's weight increases.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Some of them are due to a hidden cause that is not apparent.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I did not see this disease in children except for those whose deaths I have witnessed; and because of that, I have observed in them remarkable works.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was completely full of water, and the child's head continued to grow larger because of the water inside it until fire killed him.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture or is added between the bone and the ankle, or it is added below the ankle over the arch.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the operation is in that if the moisture is between the bone and the ankle and the pus is few, then it is necessary that you make a cut on the top of the head at an angle, and that the length of the cut be two fingers wide where the moisture runs, and this is the form of the sponge:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the pus is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, then it is necessary that you open the combs of the head completely and water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand at the inner parts and not at the outside.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then it is necessary that you make three cuts according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And take out all the moisture with a sponge; and strengthen the cuts with drapes and plumsols; and pour water from above on to it for five days, then wash the limb and cure the plague with ointment and anoint the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way to cut, which you consider according to the size of the pus and the collection of water, for some are more in the back of the head, or at the sides, or on the left or right; and so it is necessary to make a cut where the pus appears and the water collects, and pour water as well as you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause blood to flow from the head because of this flow of blood as an evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of cutting the arteries which are close to the ears, called hilus.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you introduce a cathartic or room into the chest or foot, and it is old water, and do not add to it the cure of medicines, then the last cure in this case is cutting off those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And if you want to cut those who the patient's head is red, then wash the area with an asperous sponge so that the veins appear, and make it strong with a certain cloth; and consider where the pulse beats; and the places above the ears are pinched, and some hide in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then open the vein with a sponge, and cut each one with a sponge according to each part going up to the head, and pour it through the angle of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, insert the sponge below the artery and take it up to the sides of the head.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the cut is two fingers apart, for when a vein is cut the pulse is quick to go out, and that should not be because it would cause pain.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the artery does not appear with a touch, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and open it then within the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And where there is a quick flow of blood, there is a quantity of 20 drops, and hold it firm from above 20 drops or more, and this is according to the quantity that appears of the value of the patient and the volume of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the arch, then cut it so that it does not cause a pus.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the plague with plums and a cloth of linen, and cure it with anointing within that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the veins which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When you introduce any type of headache or catarrh into the temples, because of salty water and quality of the cloths in the temples, or if it is a violent headache and looks like those with head injuries, then there are two ways to treat these headaches: by extracting the veins from the temples, or by cauterizing those.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient' head is shaven where there are hairs; and consider the pulse at the temple because it is shown by your hand; and it is hidden in a few men because of its speed.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the back of the patient is made strong with a cloth; and wash the area with an asperous cloth or evaporate it with water into a tail within that the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge of this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you untie the bow with that ease within that it reaches to the artery; and then cut it apart from above and extract that from the bow and uncover those of the tunics which are left there, all around.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of the finger, and cut one from that according to the quantity in which the ends of the fingers are extended and contracted, and do not cause a flow of blood because, if not cut, the blood would not flow completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty out the blood from 20 drops. Within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with double thread of silk or a cord long, and do not cut it until the consolidation of the plague and causes a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity which is between two cloths; and pour it in that hour or at another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want to, cauterize it with a hot knife within the bone from where the ends of the fingers are cut, and keep that place of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And the best operation is that the patient has fever or a cold complex; for cauterization helps to end the moisture, and therefore it is better in summer.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then extract the veins where you can see them clearly; and let them rest on a clean cloth, and then cure it with dry medicines to make the flesh heal quickly before that it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you open another vein in the head from which blood flows, then you stop that blood with a bandage or by pressing it, and strengthen your hand within that the blood does not flow again.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if there is no cause of those with you, then pause the bandage on the area until the headache is relieved, and put it on water very cold to relieve that headache, and make it strong according to what has happened.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And where pus is coming out of the extraction of the vein, you cut it with two knives, because you have tied the two places with a rope according to a signal, and then pause each one, igniting a fire, within that they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it is stretched between the ends of the fingers, because they are not consolidated by that time.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the two knives be sharp.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if, however, there is only a small sharpness with two knives, since they cut the meat with less speed, but do not cut it so deeply as one sharp knife, then use one sharp knife.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	And if there is some roughness in them, the heat of fire is held against them, and the flesh is separated easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better for all works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And be the space between the two knives the quantity of the thickness of the same.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of acute and acidic joint pains.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the painful and acidic joints are above the scalp of the head, and you do not find any cause in that medicine for the cure of it, and the skin of the patient is already red and blisters form on it because of the acidity of the tears, then use a different treatment for this operation, and do not use that one again.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the servant to cut the hair on the forehead quickly, and make three incisions evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision falls two times: the first incision is evenly spaced to the length of the nose in its middle place on the forehead, and the second incision according to the length a little less than the movement of the eyelids which are on the tear. And the third incision from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep your hand away from the incision of the cheeks which are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three times the size of a grain.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth wrapped around your waist.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then put the spatula between two acute ends, for this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	to separate the temples until the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	And scrape away all the tissue between two incisions that goes up to the bone, and then make a small incision from the first one until the second one.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then put this spatula in the first incision again, or another instrument called a scalpel, taken from one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And then cut the meat attached to the bone with a sharp edge, and cut it off from its attachment to the jaw, and separate all the vessels that descend from the head into the mouth.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Then continue the incision as far as possible with the spatula away from the bone, and then make a small incision in the middle until the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then pour out of the teardrops a quantity that is even, press the sides of the eyelids with ice.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place a small veil in each incision, and place over those dusts covered with blood, sweat, and tears, and let it be so that it does not produce an apoplexy of blood.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, take off the bandage and administer a great infusion of cold water or a bath, and then treat water with basilic oil or rosewater and other things that the plagues are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter four.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of tear pains by catharsis and in the joints that descend from the inside of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute pain of the head due to catharsis and sometimes the joints of the patient are very weak, and already his look at his eyes is disturbed, and his eyelids are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and in the front part of the head has a sharp and painful sensation of stinging and extrusion, you know that these accidents do not come except from the small veins that proceed from the inside of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: command the servant to shave the forehead, and make a single incision in its middle place on the forehead, a little less than the width of a grain (and begin the incision up to the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelids which are bitten by the food), within which the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the head with a sponge or dry cloth, and then place between the two lips of the incision a small veil or a piece of dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then cover with dust covered with blood, sweat, and tears, so that it does not produce an apoplexy of blood.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when the apoplexy has decreased and you see that the bone is beginning to heal, then take two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, mix it together, and make a paste of it, and administer it to these plagues in natural fruit, so that your bread is made out of it.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of water that catches in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that catches in the ears is one of four species, because it is mineral or similar to mineral, so that it is metal or its resemblance, or it is a plant, so that it is thyme or fava, or it is variable like water and sweat and their resemblances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when the mineral catches in the ear or any other similar cause of these causes that do not fit into the ear, and put the ear to the sun, and if there is still a catch, then distil it with the oil of violets or cumin, and then administer the infusion to it, and make it sneeze, and close its eyes from the coming of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some cloth or wool over the ear, and extend the ear from its attachment, for the motas that are seen in this way are more easily removed by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not removed, then administer the infusion with an instrument called a gentle epiciaticus that this is its form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is easily removed with the instrument, then do so; otherwise, administer the infusion with ten drops of double-distilled water.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not easily removed with water, then make a tube of iron, and insert the end of the tube into the hole in the ear, and close the opening of the tube with wax and moistened oil so that it is not too strong but just right.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then expel it with a small wind or strong suction, because four motas that we have mentioned are caught by water.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then if it is not easily removed in this way, take a ring of silver or an iron ring, and place on one end a small quantity, and put that end into the hole in the ear, and then wrap the other side around the ear gently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that one into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not easily removed with all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should wait until there is no apoplexy or spasm of the muscles.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that off is this: you command the servant of the head of the patient and extract from it the blood-vessel, and then treat it with the virtue of water, and then make a small incision in the middle of the ear, according to the virtue of it, and turn it over its ends, and then wrap it around the ear gently.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the wound of a round shape that reaches the cheek, and, if the cheek is swollen, hold it back with an appropriate instrument; and in that hour close the wound quickly, and cure that which has been wounded within it so that it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause hurts the ear it is one of the grasses that grow there and swell up, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey your own advice, then take a fine string according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that grass which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not pour water when you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and pause it in drops, and extrude it gently with your fingernails or with a sharp instrument, or cut it off as far as it has gone, for its extraction is easy.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear, let the patient use sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with a few drops of vinegar, and rub it over that ear in which the water is, and if by water there is a discharge, it is good; and otherwise, then take three or four young and long peals, and bind them on the fire a little, and let the patient put one of those peals into his ear, and jump over him from that split, and strike with another peal on the ear which has the discharge, and let him throw it away.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop water in the ear until all the water is discharged.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then, when the water has been discharged, take paper or a piece of wool,. and put one end into the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until it is burned up completely.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then take another piece of wool and make as many turns as necessary until all the water is discharged, and strike it with a pin as far away from the ear as it has gone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beasts which enter into that ear, if it is a small thing, then pinch it and pull it gently, cure that with what has been said above; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the head by means of the ear, then extract it with your fingernails or with a sharp instrument, and that cause is lighter than all the other causes which enter into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a vermen which is generated in the ear, when you cure that with water which has been said above and in the treatise on distillation, and do not keep your own cure, then look at the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there appears any cause of the vermen here, then extract it with your fingernails or with a sharp instrument; but if there does not appear any cause, then take a long and thin pipe from which this is the shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And introduce the thin end into the ear according to the quantity which the patient suffers; and draw it out with a strong suction, and make drops of water, so that all the vermen are discharged.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your own advice, then take a candle and close it in the circle of the pipe with wax as has been said above; then administer distillation which has already been poured out the small drops in the cure for vermen, and look at water in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	and make it long and thin, in which there is a small split, and on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then, if necessary, put it in the cavity of the cannula where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the end of it with care, and pour oil or juice from any herb, or water which you wish of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then introduce the ray with care and squeeze your hand over it, so that the oil is discharged into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels it inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And if water has been poured into the ear, it is already cut with fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep in mind that the cause which you will extract from the ear should not be rubbed too much, for the ear does not suffer from water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Earache.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some young men who have had their bellies stretched by swaddling do not perforate them, and water already exists in some people, opilation in the middle of the ear because of pain or meat there; and this opilation sometimes occurs on the outside split of the ear which does not see the head, and sometimes it is in the splits.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the outside split of it, which does not understand the head, is in difficult situations of healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you can understand the head, keep the ear of the patient away from the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	But if there is an increased swelling, open it with a sharp instrument which has been said above and which this is the shape of:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is small in size, which has one split sharp and the other not; and the knife is two thick so that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the opilation is because of hidden meat in the ear or in the middle part of it, then remove it with sharp fingernails and strike it gently, so that all the meat is removed easily.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opilation is in the split of the ear, then take a long and sharp instrument, and rub it over it with fire a little bit, and then put that in the middle part of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	But if you feel increased swelling which the patient does not notice easily, then try to press it gently; and keep in mind that you do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then put a strip of linen on it according to the width of the split which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and make drops over it every day until you are sure that the plague has consolidated; or take some and sprinkle it on the ear with three leaves, and use oil; and if the ear is already swollen, then look at the ointment which you have used, and if it is rose-colored, then change it to another ointment which you will wrap in wax, so that it does not hurt; and then heal that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and rub it on the ear, and use the other cure which has been said above to stop the flow of blood; which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Earache.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The cause of earache which is due to dampness in the ears of young people causes some sweatiness; and some dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	And then if you have those with headaches or with sharp nails, and cut their hair short, and put that over the areas where the hair is cut; and put it on the skin where the cuts are made.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is a flow of blood due to pain, then you should cauterize those with a small cauldron.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return those hairs which remain when there is no cause of their hair; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned up and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	The treatment of blindness that comes to the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Vision spots in the eyelids due to some cause that is associated with blindness and increased strength and toughness, hence why it is called blindfolds.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And is accumulation of thick moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure on them is that you should consider whether the blindness comes from above or below the eye and is spread across all of it; and the cause of it is infection.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore open that wound by its width, and with ease remove it all, and then suspend it by a rope and cut off that limb.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped to make an incision on it, then don't attempt to penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, otherwise, there will be no reason for it.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you should adjust it with sutures; and heal that within so that it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then don't worry about it because the blood of that wound will restore and heal it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the blindness is declining inside the eyelid's surface, then remove the eyelid and hang the limb by a rope, apart from any incision, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid by an incision becomes long, there will be no reason for it.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make that incision, wash the eyelids with salty water; and heal that place with water that heals within so that it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10:
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The treatment of blindness in the eyelids of the patient.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axtirnaht is when it is born in the membranes of the upper eyelids, and most often affects children, causing them to cry and have a catarrh; and they cannot see clearly because of the tears.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you should always look at their faces, and sleep on them; and their upper eyelids are covered with moisture, which already has inflammation, and the appearance of discharge appears in it; and when you press that place with your fingers, you can feel the discharge within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a way to operate on that limb; the patient holds their head in the right hand and another person places a cloth over it and makes a circle according to the amount of discharge that is found all at once, and then places that over the head and presses it with fingers, so that the discharge is forced out through a small incision made with a scalpel.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the press there is a covering that you make a small incision completely so that you reach the arachnoid, because in certain positions you produce arachnoid by incision according to the shape of white grays.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore remove it with bandages that you have wrapped between the fingers, from the front to the back, and roll between the right and left palm so that it is cut off.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful that you don't put pressure on the incision so that the spray doesn't reach the eye and burn it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you don't see arachnoid at the beginning of the incision, then put pressure on the incision with a small object so that it produces arachnoid; and then remove it as we have said; and then place bandages on him in water and oil and dust, and put them on the place and clean those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then let them drink salt water and place it in the cavity of the incision so that the water that is left of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that within so that it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if it appears pus in the place, then heal that with ointment that softens within so that it is softened.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11:
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of ways to test for blindness.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids are swollen and pricked due to natural causes, and they have been there for a long time, then test them by burning them with fire so that the pain comes; or, as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, or by sharp medicine according to whether it is in front or behind, cut and stitch them; or by canes according to whether they see.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then place the patient's head on your right hand; return the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it is turned around, then let it be; and otherwise, insert a needle into that part in which it is faithful from below the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid— close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs— close to the hairs, and pull the thread up towards the lid, and turn the eye towards you.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then open that part within the eyelid's edge, and extract the thread from the small hole or cloth, and then press the eyelid with your fingers, and see if it is like a sheet of oil.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But in any case, it is the figure according to the amount of swelling on the eyelid, because it varies in men; and if you can't tell by how much the eyelid is swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then open at the edge of the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, then let it be as thick as the hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the cloth, and carefully cut it all off, and then adjust the two lips with a thin thread or a piece of hair, and wipe off the blood, and stick what is left of that thread on to the eyebrows with some glue, if you want to do so; and if not, don' t do it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the thread heal for three or four days, and then heal that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want to, let the wound open without stitching it, and heal that with water that dries up and hardens, because the eyelid is swollen due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of it; but one way of stitching it is better. And so say the ancient doctors.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in any case, it is a treatment that can be applied to the patient; and it is a good operation, and it is not dangerous.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another way to do it is to put the patient' eye in a box; and raise the eyelid with three separate and close needles according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, then take a needle with thread, and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle close to the lacrimal major, and the third one close to the lacrinal minor, and adjust those threads according to equality, and then place them on those fingers with a slight elevation, lift all the cloth up from that part with a slight elevation.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal that within so that it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if pus appears at the place of your incision or your cut, then heal it with ointment and wrap it in a cloth.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	In some cases, the eyelids' hairs are turned around, and then use that of incision; but stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	The second sentence to be translated.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you make two slits, or two tiny prongs, of the same length as the eyelid and their width is less than the breadth of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inscribed on the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then you add a small amount of water to the lid, and tighten the prongs of each part with great care, and leave it for several days, because it will die and rot if it is not cut off soon.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break the lid, and cure the plague before it heals over itself.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is hard, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two prongs that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there is the quantity of length and breadth, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising hairs that prickle in the lid when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly, then you take a small needle, and insert it in the lid with great care, and let it run through the soft part of the eyelid, and adjust the ends to be as close together as possible.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the strings is a palm's width.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you take another small needle and insert it between the first one and the eyelid, and adjust the ends as you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient' s hat on his head upside down, and keep it close to the sun because the operation is subtle and small.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then you insert the needle into the root of the hair, with great care, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid so that it does not damage the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then you pull the hair out from under, and insert it into the needle, and the hairs are one, two or three at a time, neither more nor less.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then you remove your hand so that the hair is pulled out from under and inserted into the eyelid with the hair attached to it in the lid with the hair attached to it.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the hair is pulled out with the root, you will pull it out from above with the thread that you have tied to it, but if it is not pulled out with the root, then you will pull it out of place and it will be difficult to cut off.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then you will cut off the thread with the vision of the lid, because then you will remove it from place and tighten it, and leave it for two or three days, so that the hair does not fall off from its place and does not grow on top of it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too long, then you adjust a long hair of the natural hairs, and lift it up to that spot, or let it fall so that it is not pulled out, but instead you lift it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of the lid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the lid is contracted above it, and is contracted to the right or left side, in case of a bad consolidation of plague or of a section or cauterization, it is called leporina, and this is contracted by consolidation of plague or of sections or cauterization, or by analogy with them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation is that you make an incision in the consolidation and separate the lips of the lid, and keep them apart until they are healed between two strips of cloth.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	You should not use the cure of the lid from the causes that dry it out, because if you do so, the pus will return to its place rather than being cured.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	You should use fenugrec for the causes that soften it, and bathe it in hot water with some salt and oil, or with oil of dandelion, which is to be liquefied with some oil, and dip the cloth into it, and cure it with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your cure is that you perform all the operations except those which are consolidated according to the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is no other than a correction of the lid which does not return to its place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of the lid above.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cure, which is made in the lid below, is called by the name of alxacrati, and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is made because of plague or section or cauterization or by analogy with them.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with two threads, and keep it in the flesh, and make it run between the lacrimal bone from the left side to the right side, so that the thread runs into both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then you stretch the flesh between the prongs with the needle and cut it off with a sharp blade, and mark it with a wide line.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if the shape of the lid returns to what it was before, it is good; otherwise, you take the line and keep it on the split, and at that place you turn the lid over, and make the two slits in the middle of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Then make the ends of the two slits at different angles from the incision, so that they meet together, and so make the figure of them come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then hold the flesh that way, according to the breadth of the eyelid, so that it closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then you adjust the separated parts and stitch them with a thread, and then you cure those with water that we have spoken of to soften, and with calamine within which is cured.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the alxacrati of this chapter is by section or suture or cauterization, then you should make a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what comes before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the calamine between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of the alxacrati when it is below or above, which is carried out in the operation, according to what it is prepared as the alxacrati, and that is in a form of different shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the craftsmen who are wise prepare all at any time in such a way that it does not return to its place according to what is natural, or close to that, and this bad one according to what it suits him from the operation and of the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men who are prone to it, so that the eyelid is solid with the whites of the eye, and is forbidden by the ease of movement and natural works, so when you put your finger on the edge of the lid from below, and lift it up, or extend it with a point.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you mark the adhesion with a sharp blade, which should not be sharp at all of the incisions, holding your hand slightly away so that the bad one does not disturb the operation, and keep the blade from cutting the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision, which will remove that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all of the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then add water to it, salty water that you will rinse with; or distill it in zunic water which dissolves in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a chisel; put a woolen pad dipped in an alum solution over it, and after three days use a cautery to cut away any hardened tissue so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the eyelid and of eminence of flesh of the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is according to two ways, because it is either nervous, and resembles hard ciphe or subtile; or non-nervous, resembling frozen white humidity, which when pricked, can easily come off, and the point where it was pricked, does not stay there.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both substances do not begin until they are in the eyelid; and that which is above the eye begins little by little, covering the sight, and preventing the light from moving the eyelids.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to work on the incision of the eyelid is that the patient raises his head to the sky, and opens his eyelids with your hand, and removes the lid with a small knife and cuts at the roots of the eyelashes.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take an awl and insert it into that hair of the horse or cow or fish, or of the same, or of the fat, and double the end of the awl little by little and make it stay in the middle of the eyelid, and pierce it with the awl, and cut it through with the awl; and remove that one at the roots, and separate it from the lid, and that which remains is to cut through the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And you should follow that with the hair inside to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then cut the edge of it with a sharp knife or with small scissors, and leave the flesh of the eyelid intact by itself, so that through that incision there does not flow continuous tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in some cases the eyelid is extended with oil or fat, as it has been said; and after that, cut through with a lion's claw, whose form this is.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the blade, and that the hole is made in it, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make an incision in the eye a little bit of salt mixed with fine sand, and leave that inside for another day; and after that, wash it out with water so that it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot put the awl in it, nor stay there attached to it; then cure this kind of eyelid with medicines, and so heal it without incision and recommend it in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to cut that, then open the eyelids of the patient and take a sharp lion's claw; in this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if that is rarefied and confining and becomes in the edge, then distill it from your eye with fine sand or salt, and wash out the eye after another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that until all of it is removed, but if not, let it remain in the eye; because then leave it alone, and at first cure any swelling within, so that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the eyelid, if it is a great inconvenience in the eye, is suspended with a point; and cut that one from that one, and do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the eyelid with sharp sand or salt, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of the eyelids and of water which is born from flesh that is attached to the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some of the eyelids of cows is born flesh that is attached to the eye, and it overlaps the pupil, or approaches it closer to the brow bone and is assembled with rope of a bull's horn.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on it is that the patient raises his head to the sky, and opens his eyelids with your hand, and removes all that flesh with a convenient knife, and then wash it with water, using a forceps or basket; and at first cut that flesh, until it is completely finished with the incision, and guard against the eye that does not cut off that part of your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be the incision that you make with this, or with a sharp blade, which we have recommended in the incision of the eyelid, or with small scissors, according to the form of it, which is appropriate for this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salt and spice, or distill in it a powder which resembles the corrosive medicines, and place it over the eye with a paste of horse's skin, so that the swelling within it is prevented from happening.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of algardenici and it is severe and sharp cauterization, and you are afraid of the swelling within, then leave the eye alone, and cure that swelling with water, which softens that swelling, and repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed, and resembling in the attached flesh what happens in the eye.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, keep in mind that you remove any cure of the brow bone by a natural or accidental way, done with fire, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter  .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of sap in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The sap is also a vein which is attached to the eye and prevents you from doing its operation, and it detaches the brow from days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at first it is necessary that you consider if the brow in which the sap is attached is strong and in it there is not another malaise than the sap, then collect that sap.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you order the patient to raise his head to the sky, and suspend those veins with a point, a little or according to your prudence; and may that point be double according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or also two points gradually in one part according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins are collected with sharp scissors, with subtlety, and abstains from taking the sap more than once an hour, until those veins are separated from the brow and they are rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not touch the eye with the edge of the blade; and if your operation is in the morning sun, and keep firm in your operation so that you do not cut off anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you are finished, then you distill in the eye with sharp sand or salt so that the sap which is separated from the brow is softened by it.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If water is not possible for you to collect all of it in an hour, and then you implant all of it with water which softens the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain in it is subsided and that swelling within it is prevented from happening.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat on it according to the same way until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter   .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reduction of aridity to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat acute inflammation with sharp medicine or cauterization according to what precedes the description of it and is not healed, do not work on it except that you break over the abscess to reach its maturity, and extract all moisture in it that can be exposed the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is exposed and infected or blackened, then you should use a tool which has this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp hat, and it is made of iron, and the hat is curved so that it can be punctured by a lime point or finely cut by a small point (so it is in this form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then put that above the place of bone corruption, and move it back and forth between the fingers, and gently press your little hand on it little by little until you feel that the corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Then make some cuts, and restore the area with drying and constrictive causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and it is good meat that is separated from the sinew of the body and heals by itself in ten days, and is not renewed and does not become an abscess and does not happen to it an accident, then you know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, it is not a matter of working on it except to reduce the breach to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when you have uncovered the bone, then you should work according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The edge of the iron is triangular, and the handle of it is first weakened within the edge so that it is like this sometimes also.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then put that above the bone, and it is near the lacrimal; and make your hand long on the handle, and put your little hand gently on the tribe until it enters all the bone, and the patient feels heat through your hand touching his leg.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with drying medicine also according to this: if you have heated it well.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the meat and place have been hardened, then the matter that had escaped from its opening returns to the nose, so you put a little bit of salt on it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Emphasis of the Hand.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hand swells to its entirety and does not happen an accident or a decrease, then you should loosen the bandage, and then what follows, and then what stops wind in the neck with a good sacrifice and sucking; and then put oil on the hand which is made of catarrh and bile and salves and blood, and tighten the plaster on the hand with powdery dust.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powder is that you take linen cloth which is made of lions' hair, and each cloth is doubled into four pieces; and make these clothes out of the hair.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then put those on top of each other according to the quantity which the hand needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten those on top of each other with a strong tight bandage; and repeat the wind with a good sacrifice and sucking; and then stop the wind and leave the hand alone for a day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Or if the bandage becomes soft between times, then you should make it tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then stop the bandage until the next day and night as well.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hand has already been reduced, it is good, and if not, then you should repeat the plaster with the powder and constriction and wind until it has healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Emphasis of the Vein.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the emphasis in the vein is disrupted, and it becomes prominent and protrudes outward with a little blade of razor, and it is like this that the form of a man is shown through it, and you want to make an incision, then perform the operation as I have described, that you insert the blade into the base of the veils of the eye on the side of the orbit, and then put another blade which has double the thread from the lacrimal part, and let that penetrate and leave the first blade according to its disposition; and then make an incision at the base of the double thread and pull it out along with the edge, and tighten that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the blade and place it on the hand, immersing it in almond oil and leaving it until it hardens.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then heal the hand with oil so that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Sometimes all the edges of the hand are made smaller by a circle of cloth tightly around the emphasis, and then it is pierced with a fine blade that enters into the root of the finger, and runs the watery albuminous fluid, and relaxes the hand and enters as much as it can.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten it so that it has healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Treatment of Eye.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, which is called alconati, is not anything except a sickness that is adjusted in the hand resembling falling water and is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Then the method of working on it is that you make the bandage with three fingers and hold it so that the eye is higher than the hand, and then take four fingers and place them under the eye so that the eye does not touch the bandage, and then let the eye rest until it comes to its sense; and then stop the disease from coming to the openings of the eye.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down in the lower part, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it is not prepared to let the disease fall into water which we have described, then make a small blade on the edge of the cloth and place it under your fingers so that the eye does not touch the cloth, and then let the disease come out as much as possible; (at the edge of the veil) connecting to the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown  (in the location where the vein comes out), until the disease is completely gone.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it has been completely removed, then you should distill in the hand water that is mixed with honey or water in which you have already built fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be cleaned with other causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Treatment of Water Falling from the Hand.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already spoken about the spices of water in the division and what conveys to pierce with sound saying, then do that for healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the bandage tight between your fingers on a ring and hold the patient's hand so that the pulse is high, and then take four fingers and place them under the pulse so that it does not touch the bandage, and then let the water fall on the hand; and then stop the disease from coming to the openings of the eye.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then put your little hand next to the eyelid of the patient' hand, if the water is on the left hand; or next to the patient' right eyelid, if the water is on the right hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then hold your little hand with your right hand if the hand is left-handed; or with your left hand if the hand is right-handed.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place the end of the blade next to the crown according to its thickness with almond oil on the hand from the side of the lacrimal, and then insert the blade with skill and move your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then pierce into the almond oil on the hand and feel that the water has come to the eye cause;
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Then the measurement of the path of almond to the root is the measure of the space from the pupil within to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the hand; because you see the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the kidney into the hollow where the water is; and throw one of the servants up another step, so that if the water falls soon it will fall on a higher level than the kidney; and then the patient will hold the kidney in his hand.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And if it stops for a moment; then, if the water falls soon, you will put another step down before the kidney is thrown.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And if it stops for a moment and does not fall, then you will remove the kidney easily and slowly, and place it in a cup of clear salt water extracted from a gem; and then wash the wound thoroughly with rose oil and albumen mixed with water. And finally stop the bleeding by applying a compress or a wool pad soaked in rose oil and albumen.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May no longer be used, as they are only from our own time; instead, place a trisseled cake on it made of rose oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey the instructions regarding the hard part of the wound – for some men's wounds are very hard because of their constitution – then, when you have taken the spatulum which is called 'alberid' and which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce it with the spatulum at that point, and do not finish your stroke; and if you have not already done so, stop and make a small incision.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then place the kidney according to what I have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You should praise his work, prepare a comfortable bed for him to sleep on in dark surroundings, and prohibit all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Place the kidney in its natural state so that it is soft, and do not touch his head to the left or right.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And place the kidney according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove it from that dark room and examine it carefully; then return it within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not make a water infusion at the time of the cure, nor too soon afterwards.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, when you have removed it, do not immerse it in water because the water will wash it away with great force.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May no occur an aposteme if you do not remove the kidney within seven days; then return it to water in order to obtain an aposteme.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you shall remove the patient's hair and cover his face with a cloth so that he does not feel the cold; continue to keep him in the dark room for several days, because it is in this way that he will get over his cold.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then remove him from that house with care and ask about his reasons.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You must know that the doctor is not allowed to show any favoritism towards anyone; and then you should be diligent in performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	It has already been revealed to us by some of those who are of the Order, and some said that it causes a fire in the eye when the kidney is pierced with an awl, causing water to gush out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, in our own land it has not yet been determined whether water is the cause of this condition or if it is due to some other factor; and perhaps it is a new disease.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medications which can be applied to those who do not know how to apply them correctly:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of iron or steel, and the ends of the triangle are shaped like this: [A triangle with one point up and one down]
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure for a nosy nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various kinds of hidden carns that gather together like a swarm of flies, or because of a certain type of weightiness, this illness is called polyps because it resembles the appearance of a fly swarm.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if the carn is cancerous, or has a green color; and if it is not, then it is lion carn with a grayish color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in those that are neither fraudulent nor cancerous lion carns, place them between your palms and put them in the shade, and pierce them with a small needle in those areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove it from between the palms, and cut it with a very fine tool that is easy to hold; then, if for any reason you need to cut it again, do so with another tool that is also very fine.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May no occur an aposteme if it is caused by cold or heat, then remove the water from it carefully; or if it is a malicious apostema, cut it open with a sharp blade and cauterize it thoroughly. If it is necessary to cut it again, make sure all cuts are clean.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then place the nose in a position where the incision can be made with ease; and if the nose needs to be cut into two parts, do so with care.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May no occur a nosy if it is swollen and there is moisture inside the palate; then you will know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May not occur if the moisture does not penetrate according to what has been said; then you will know that inside the nose there is no carn or pus, because there has been no cutting.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then place the needle firmly into the center of the nose, and test it with different types of movements; then place one end of the needle inside the nostril, another inside the mouth, and so on, depending on what reason it might serve.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when the water comes out, let it run over so that it reaches the nostrils and the mouth; and if it makes a sound like that of a cow, then know that children have this effect in school; and let there be no objection to doing this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place both ends of the needle outside the nose and inside the mouth; then wrap a thread around the ends of the needle tightly, and make sure the thread is secure because it will be used to remove the needle. The needle should be placed inside the nostril and the mouth so that its odor can reach the nostrils; and if it makes a sound like that of an ox, then you know that children have this effect in school, and there is no objection to doing this.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the needle and place the nose between your palms; and if it is necessary to cut again, do so with care over a period of three days or more while applying a cooling substance to the area where there is any pain.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then at the end of the matter, place a lead tube or pipe in the nose for the discharge of the secretions over time until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May no occur if you are using an effective cure, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the shape of the instrument for cleaning and making medicinal oils in the nose: [A small curved tube with a sharp point]
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	It should be made of silver or iron; it should resemble a small open lamp with a small wedge, and the metal should be shiny.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make the tube closed at one end with a flat or rounded end; and place it in your hand so that you hold it by its tail, as you will use it to apply oils or water to the secretions and for other reasons.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These are the most precious ingredients: castor oil, white balsam, ginger, golden seal, long pepper, squill, and aniseed hyssop. Take the following ingredients: blood and bile, and make pills; let one be taken with warm water, and place them in the patient' nosicles while he is sleeping.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the nose's two ends.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The nose tips are red, and are swollen in the extremities, and become more so over a period of time; then, there is a pain in it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And so that you may find out about its beginning, and see all of this.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place over the area a hot or healing medicine that was in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is delayed until it becomes swollen, then consider that it is infected, hard, of a bad color and of little feeling, then do not touch that one, because those who cut this wound will be responsible for the great damage that will happen to him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	But if the ulcer is sharp and not of a dark color, and sometimes cutting it is possible in all of this, then empty out the patient’s bowels and cut away part of it without fear, and heal the area with water that comes out and constricts it until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Surgery of the Nose, Lips, and Ear When the Continuity is Broken by Plague or Similar Causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when this continuity occurs in one of these cartilage bones, it rarely gives the opportunity for surgery except in a few people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when such a thing happens because of some cause, consider whether it is fresh plague and then adjust the two lips of the disease with sutures and carefully heal them until they are healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	But if the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is healed separately, then consider that you remove any piece of its knot apparently until it does not cause pain.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with sutures and make them strong, and sprinkle on them dragon's blood and honey-concoction three times, and place over the powder a little gold leaf, or of some other kind of consolidating plaster, and let it lie for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster and let it lie for seven to ten days, and carefully heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the way of the suture is that you add the solution for continuity or with needles as it has been mentioned in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with needles if there is a break in the suture.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter.xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Removal of Causes That Come About in the Two Lips at the Points of Separation Internally.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The nose tips are red in some men in the points of separation internally in their lips; some of these are small and some are large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you remove the lips and divide each of those hard things completely, then fill in the place with three threads carefully until the pain is relieved, and wash it with vinegar and cure the area with water that has been made stingy, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter.xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the cutting of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken when cutting the flesh adjusted in the gums; those who do this should use white cheese or cut it with knives and then put on the gum a little blood, and let it run out or let the pain come.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place over the area carefully a dry thread or any other kind of stingy powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again secondarily and heal it with a hot cautery, because the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reasons for Teeth to be Sharp.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth, at the points of separation inside and in the foramen and between the gums are adjusted, sharp and rough, some become black and turn yellow or green due to decay in the gums, and some of the teeth that are broken into.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so when you take the head of the victim between your hands and place it in a certain position, then cut the hair that is on it, and carefully examine the teeth where those roughnesses and causes are similar to sand, until you can distinguish the blackness and the yellowness and the others until they are completely removed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if what is left is in the beginning of the reason, then do not cut it; but if it is in the middle or at the end, then carefully repeat the reason over those again and again until you reach the last point in which you want to arrive.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that teeth have different shapes and forms, depending on how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, because the reason for the tooth that is separated inside has different shapes from the reason where it is sharp between the teeth, and these shapes of reasons are always prepared in advance by you, so that you will soon see them.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On Root Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you heal the tooth from its pain with a strong medicine and delay in the total extraction of it, because there is no reason that replaces the lost substance of it when it is extracted, because it is an exalted substance within which is an excuse for the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Then when the victim is forced to extract the tooth, you must carefully determine which tooth is causing pain; because the pain of the tooth can be lost in a healthy tooth, and you extract that tooth and let the pain continue until the tooth that caused the pain is extracted, because we have already seen this through the operation of barbs.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you must carefully determine which tooth is causing pain, and that you know well, then when you cut into the route of the tooth with a sharp scalpel where there is no virtue, until it dissolves from the gum completely, and carefully extract it little by little with tiny tweezers or with scissors at the beginning slowly until it is extracted completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then place the head of the victim between your strong tenacles or hold it with a strong grip that does not hurt you; then let go of the head and carefully extract the tooth that is causing pain slowly with a gentle pull or with a loud noise, and let the other tooth that does not cause pain be extracted in such a way that it does not break it, nor hurts the victim.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	Then if it is not a foramen (a hole), then take one of those instruments, and put that under the gum completely with ease and attempt to remove it in such a way that it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is twisted or corroded, then consider that you take a piece of cloth and tie it up with a knot at the end; then carefully remove it from under the gum completely in such a way that it does not break in your hand during your constriction on it with a strong grip.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Then when you open completely with a sacrifice in the route of the gum completely and hold your strength so that it does not break it and cause pain in the first place; then return to the head of the victim by the evil that is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember that you should not do anything similar to what the barbers do in their final stage and audacity regarding the extraction of them; because the teeth that break out in large men are more difficult than those that are broken, and the roots of their teeth are completely removed, or some of them, or extract them with bones from the mandible in such a way as not to be torn, and the teeth that come out like this have been testified by many.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then the extraction of it should be washed with vinegar or acetic acid with a salt solution.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are flowing pus on the wound, then also add a few drops of oil to it, and spritz on the plague, and if that does not work, then apply cauterization.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezers is different, but at the beginning a long thin tip is used, a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when operating with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if sometimes the handle is too long, so that it does not bend when you start to use it, then short ends should be used.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of iron from India with short ends, and at the ends of those are teeth that enter each other and start to squeeze tightly, and some have a beaked shape like a crow's beak, which is sharp, and they are very tight in their grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the removal of teeth and the breaking of bones from the locked mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is locked in place due to some cause, then let the area rest for a day or two until it softens; and then insert tweezers or forceps at the ends that are joined together like a crow's beak, which is sharp, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them are made to enter each other thus: with a file or an awl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your master with these forceps or tweezers, then let him cut off the flesh completely and insert the instrument which has the name of an awl, so it is a small lever whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a thick end and not be bent so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the flesh is hollowed out by this water, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the first instrument has a triangular shape at the end, with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a thin tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And you are now helped with these instruments, having two ramps whose this shape is suitable for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which will be used to shave teeth; for comfort is achieved with this instrument which is assembled like an apple core remover, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular end twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you know that the dental tools are similar to other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the master artisan be wise and subtle in this art, take care of himself according to what is written for him, as it is his duty to know the various malady; because the small tools did not say or pause their own instruments, due to the different shapes.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the master know how to remove locked bones of the jaw or other teeth, or if they are loose; then take care in his place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned for extracting the roots of teeth, and help yourself with these gestures whose this shape is suitable:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be of a small size to the large, and be applied or held tight to the mouth so that it does not escape or run away until the whole bone is hollowed out; and then restore the place with suitable medicines according to what has been written.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May the master know how to remove small fractures, then break that fracture from its color and blackness, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter.XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural structure of the mouth, and especially when they are in women's mouths, and even more so in elderly women; then let you consider: if a tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and it is impossible to cut it or apply oil to it, then pull it out; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose this shape is suitable for it; and it resembles pig's tail, and is made of iron from India with a sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let you cut it off on the third day due to the hardness of the tooth, and not let it be joined to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is difficult to cut with a razor, then cut it with this razor of iron from India whose this shape is suitable:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of iron from India and the point is sharp; and it should have a small end with a file that makes needles, and the tooth should be shaved slowly and easily on the third day due to ease, so that another tooth is not joined to it.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And let you tie it in a knot, and cut it off with a small razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose one side is locked and the tongue does not let it go, then cut that part off which is caught and bent, and flatten it so that the tongue does not stick or corrupt the speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter.XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When there is a concussion or removal of teeth by impact or impact, and the tongue does not bear out on it that it is painful to touch with gold wire, but rather with silver wire, because silver hardens quickly, whereas gold takes longer; but silver does not change its shape over time, whereas gold does.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the wire be so fine and strong according to what can be inserted between the teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then increase the twist of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or both are loose, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the process to the other side of the tooth that you started with, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it does not hurt.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let you tie up the wire in a knot to hold on to the roots of teeth that do not come out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the wire with tweezers or nippers, and place it in any location with the gesture, and hide those between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not damage the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let you leave it there straightened out with a string.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May the master know how to handle those wires that have slipped or broken; and hold them in place as needed during all their time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of teeth and the figure of the removal of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two are pushed back into their places, and they are healed with this receding; and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	But it is not done by anyone but skilled and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some are suitable for a cause of the bones of cows, and they are made to fit like teeth, and are placed in their place where it does not hurt the tooth, and are strengthened with this, and remain there and serve them for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter.XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the cutting of the thread which is seen in the tongue, and the speech is forbidden to be corrupt.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	And this thread which leaves the tongue behind it some times or is natural to the tongue; or it happens by accident due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, there being a lid in the middle of his chest; and you raise his tongue, and cut that nerve according to its depth so that the tongue does not move from its place.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Now if there is any stiffness or swelling, and this is done for the consolidation of the plague, then you pour oil and cut that according to its depth so that the joint is cut and the swelling is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is not a fracture in the bone of the foot, and that you do not cut here flesh and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the wound of the cut, whether it is dry or wet or has been rubbed with water; and let the tongue rest; but if it is necessary to move the patient's tongue, do so carefully so that it does not become stiff again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Now if there is a flow of blood, put vinegar on the spot three times; now if the blood flows, then cauterize that spot with the cauldron of wine which is put in water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some wounds leave the tongue swollen like a small swelling preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is very strong to open the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient before the sun, and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is red or black, hard, for which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch that part, for it is bitter.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is white, for which there is moisture, then pour oil on it and cut it with a sharp knife, and cut all of it; and if the blood flows at the time of your operation, then stop it with vinegar, so that the blood does not flow again.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work as soon as you have finished it with care, washing it with water and salt; and heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of two ears and that which is nothing in the olive oil and other swellings.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you have tried in the olive oil, then such glands are assembled as small swellings, which appear suddenly and are called two ears, which, when you treat them with water which I have mentioned in the division, and they do not heal, then examine whether the swelling is hard, red or black, and whether it hurts, do not touch that part, for it is bitter.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is a swelling of pain and the root is large, then do not touch that part because of the flow of blood; but if it has grown older, and he or she tears it himself or herself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is a white swelling, small and the root soft, then that one is likely to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you examine, before your operation, whether the swelling has subsided by itself or has decreased by any decrease; and then put the patient in the sun, with his head turned back, and open his mouth, and place a servant under his tongue, holding it down so that it does not move.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It is made of silver or brass, and it is sharp with a point.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then put oil on it and show it to him; and pour oil on the thumb, and hold it in the crease of his wrist, pulling it with your fingers as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another water that does not cause any harm to the patient, and hold him in this way:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, however, the ends of them are sharp, so that the opening of each one is in the edge of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron tempered and annealed.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Now if this instrument is not with you, then cut it with a sharp knife, and make it so: It is sharp at one end, not sharp at the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Then, having made one cut, make the other according to this method of cutting, and then wash the patient with water mixed with oil.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Now if there is a flow of blood, wash the patient with water boiled with rose water or apple juice and similar things, so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	In some wounds there are two ears and you cut them according to what I have said in the cutting of two ears, and heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with a swelling that was born in her olive oil, which swelling was red and not painful, and the woman had closed her olive oil, and she could breathe well, and she had forbidden her to eat or drink anything, and she was about to die if she did not drink water, and so it was.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the swelling has grown so much that it has made two hernias within her, which have come out through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut him with a sharp knife and pulled it out, and threw it far from me, and then I held his tongue with my hand, and then I put the oil in that swelling.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut him a large piece off, and there was no blood flowing from it but a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then absolutely I cut off the olive oil of that woman, and soon after she drank water, and then I stopped her from eating anything for a long time; then that swelling occurred in its place, which cut it as it should be cut, and succeeded in healing it.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I went away and cauterized her olive oil, then I walked and did not know that God was near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the cutting of a blister when it is swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When it blisters, and is swollen and long, then it is called a pimple; and if it is round and large, then it is called a bunion.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Now when it is healed with water which I have mentioned in the division, and has not responded to your treatment, and that swelling is long, and there is blood, red or black, and it does not hurt the patient; then you can cut off the swelling which is added to him, for it is a matter of fear on the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that swelling according to the way I have told you of its whiteness and length, then let him go free, and put your hand on his tongue with the instrument which I have mentioned in the cutting of two halves; and then hold the oil in one half, and cut it with the other half.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you will not cut off that swelling but with water which is fit for the natural term; for if you cut it off, it will prevent her from speaking.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then heal this one by cutting it, using water which I have mentioned in the cutting of two halves; and then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Now if the patient is frightened by the cutting of him, then you can use oil in cauterizing him; and the way of cauterizing him is with sharp water, which I have mentioned in this chapter, and you stop that person from speaking, and you put your hand on his tongue with the instrument which I have mentioned in the cutting of two halves; and then pour into the cavity of the instrument the water which I have mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing; and then heal this one from other causes, so it is healed.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here is the translation of the text into English line by line:
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it onto the uvula for an hour from when you start, so that it doesn't become discolored and numbed by the taste of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it around the tip of the finger, dip the finger in the medicine, and insert the finger wrapped in the medicine into a tube for as long as you can obtain what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave that there for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to repeat the medicine, do so again, and sterilize the cauterization with a cotton swab dipped in alcohol, rinse it with water and apply oil, and wash it with soap, and cure it externally with salves, within which it will heal.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is safer than surgery and less feared.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some are cured of the uvula with water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, as it is treated with smoke in this way: Take herb steam, hyssop, chamomile, dried leaves, and similar things to those listed here, and prepare them all together in a bowl, and dip them in vinegar, and boil them; then strain the liquid well, and put it in a container with a lid, and a hole in the lid over which place an instrument that is sharp and pointed, made of silver or metal; do this often.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And dip the end into the patient's mouth so that the steam reaches the uvula through the opening, so that the uvula becomes dark.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this treatment several times over the affected areas until they are dry, and be sure not to do this type of treatment at the same time as taking an emetic, because it would greatly increase the emesis, which is not what you want with this cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Or if you don' have this instrument, take a cane and close the end with a stopper of clay, so that the patient' mouth is covered, because the stopper of clay prevents steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter  .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of thorns and of water that adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Thorn-like deposits adhere to the throat or spine of a patient, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then extract water that appears from it, and observe through which part of the mouth it flows, because you place your tongue on the instrument in front, so that it is clear to you where the water comes from.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And water that does not appear to you in the throat, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because it greatly increases the cause of inflammation of the throat; or have the patient drink a nut of oil or radish leaves or a piece of dry bread; or take a dry sponge of sea grass, and squeeze it hard on the flesh, and put that to the patient' mouth, because it forces it down; or because the patient drinks a piece of dry sponge.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a snake and put it on the meat, and extract it with a twist and a pull; or take a pig and twist its tail; or because you twist a piece of meat.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Or if you don' do those things that we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this shape:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	It should be larger at one end than the other, and in the end you should make a cavity that you can easily put into the patient' mouth.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And keep the patient' head elevated, and be careful that your touch doesn' reach his jaw bone or spine, so that it does not cause him pain when you place your hand on his face; or because you put your hand on his throat.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient puts his hand on himself, he will feel more pain because of the heat of his own body, and it will touch the area where the cause is attached and cause him pain; or because he pulls his hair back.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting blood that has become attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is extracted with water that we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicine and does not flow easily, consider the throat of the patient on the left side, because you have moved your tongue with the instrument that we have described.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then, if you want to extract the blood, do so with a small blade or a gentle grasp.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with your own hand, take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient' throat, and place a burning iron in the hollow part of the tube, and make as many passes as necessary (while the blood is dead and no longer attached to the throat) and stop up the mouth.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a jug full of water, and work the mouth with it, rinsing it; and do not drink any food or drink water for an hour after that, because the blood is soon removed from the throat when it feels wet.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Or if the blood is not flowing with water that we have mentioned, then smoke the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument that we have described in the smoking of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do as much as you can.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	This is another way to operate by smoking the uvula, which involves taking a bowl in which there are carbon ignitions, and covering it with a cloth, and placing a tube on that, and dipping the end of the instrument into the bowl; then remove the smoke from the tube; and have the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape; because you know that the smoke reaches the uvula when it feels hot.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if the smoke does not work, then repeat this treatment several times over, and keep the patient from drinking; and have them eat salty food and herbs, and not drink water, and do so until it works.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument that works best to extract blood from the throat when it is visible; and it is similar to pliers, except that it is curved:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	It should be placed in the throat, and the end is similar to a parrot' beak, which is sharp, made of lead; because when you press it against something, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 10.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of speech in the form of aphorisms and in the section concerning surgery.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Aphorisms are special types of phrases, remembered in different ways, from each of the following in this text.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And so, in piercing and cutting them with two methods, one is due to the kind of blisters in themselves; and because of the moisture they have.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is due to the areas in which it occurs on the body, for the blister in the head is different from the one in the buttocks; and the one in the flesh area is different from the one in the joints; and each of them is treated by a different operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	More blisters are some that cover without being pierced, but rather due to the maturation of the pus in them or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other blisters are those that cover and must be cut when they are crossed, but not mature according to their completion, then there are blisters that are close to joints, because the blister when it approaches a joint, its essence is prolonged within until it is able to corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing pain in that limb; or it is a blister close to a principal member, and if you delay perforating it, it will not be mature towards that principal member; or it is close to the buttocks, then you should pierce what does not mature, otherwise it will not be cured; or that it does not cover, because it will not be able to remove its pus; or that it does not come out of the body, so as not to produce a fistula, or that it does not come out from the word of it so as not to be cured.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	More cover that you know the time for perforating the blister, and then it is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it has matured when there is a cessation of pain and fever, and there is a decrease in rigor and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the blister, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you know that piercing will come out from the pus area of the blister and from the pus coming out from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should always be done from the length of the flesh or the body, if the blisters are in the parts of the limbs or feet, and in the locates of the intestines, nerves, arcologies; and finally, in all places that are joined to each other, because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	More when the blister is in a carnous area, then there are two things to do, first, let's leave the perforation of it until its complete digestion according to its completion, as I have already said; because if you pierce it from ahead, the substance of it will be prolonged within until it reaches a hard matter, and its lips will be thick and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More blisters should be pierced according to the thickness of the flesh or body that necessity requires, or according to which member it belongs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer a small piercing, and in the large blisters make a large piercing or cut them according to the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other blisters are those that cover and must be crushed when they are cut, so as not to spread it out, because it does not happen in the skin but in the flesh, or in the bones; or that it is in groups of two or three together, which must also be treated with a different operation.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut on three sides; and of those that are cut in a shape like an oak leaf, and of the blisters that are made on the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these two types, round section and lunar section, and resembling to them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More than that one whose blisters are superficial lions, you should pierce it with a superficial piercing or flat piercing only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the blister is thick and has collected some pus, then you should pierce it and do not cover it up; first take a little out, and on another day take more out, and make small cuts according to the gradient until you reach the piercing.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And in general, if the person is of a fiery nature, or of a feminine one, or a small child, or an old man in decay, because the animal spirit has moved to get rid of the pus, and it hurts the patient greatly; then close them up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter well-protected, and when you administer a piercing on these blisters, avoid the plagues and consider carefully; if the blister is small, or it is a flat cut, then you should pierce it with a thin needle, and if the blister is large, and the cuts are deep, then you should pause a moment so that they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a part of the cord or a part of the blister is cut off or crushed in the circuit, then you should bind it with a old man's thread or a thin ribbon of linen, and as soon as it has been washed or shaved, wet it; and make it strong after three days; and then treat it, and cure what water comes out from within that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	More if a flux of blood happens during your operation, then you should administer warm water and vinegar on it, and put a cloth on the area where the blood is; and pause it with a thin cloth.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	More if the blood does not stop, then you should administer the medicine and treatment that I have recommended in several areas of this book, and in division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	More if it is in winter time, and the area of the blister is a cold area of nerves, then you should put powdered vinegar or oil on a wound, and pause it.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer time, and the areas are flesh, then you should put powdered vinegar or oil on water and oil, and all of this should be done after three days, as I have already said; and then treat the blister, and cure what water comes out from within that it may be healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of blisters in general, but according to the way of distinction that I have already said, there are different ways of curing them by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter L.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the cutting of blisters that come in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head are small blisters and they have two types: some contain thin layers, and others contain thick ones.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are pigs, and those that contain moisture resembling to lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture resembling to honey, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, and dry.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the cutting of all of them, and in the extraction of those that are not cut with a sharp knife, do not make an opening that will cause pain to the patient; and when you extract those, then do so with a sharp knife.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the cutting of them is that you prepare those with an instrument in the shape of which you wish to cut; that is called an entomes, until you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if the thing that contains it is moisture, then cut it with a section according to its length; and do so with a superficial section according to this shape.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line B to line G; then, when the moisture is removed, then you should skin off that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any trace of it; because five sights return if they are left, because there will be five causes.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then dip it in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, then in water and salt; and fill it with the ointment up to a certain point, because water corrupts it; and leave it for another day, because with water it will be corroded all over.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And let it repeat that ointment with Egyptian oil twice and third time if you want to, until you are sure there is no remaining cause of that film; then cure the plague with the same ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a swollen patch of skin that is greasy, then let you draw this line over it in this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	a section has the form of a crust, and cut between two lips of the section and scrape it all out, and strain your power into the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If however you have trouble with burning, then let me tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And apparently do on the swollen patch of skin and cure it according to what I have told you; and if cutting over the swollen patch is easy, then it is little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times so much of these swollen patches that are on the head of some old men and cut them with sharp knife and put them in water; for it causes that if you cut over a swollen patch on the head of an old woman and cut them like this with a sharp knife, pain will come to her; and if there is someone who has a swelling, plague will come to him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other swollen patches on the head this chapter is not about; for example, if the swollen patches come to the heads of children and make their ears grow out, then let all cutting of these be only a superficial cut.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the piercing of those that are from the lower part of them, so that their body is relieved from the heat in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then let you cure those with water that agrees with it.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter.xliii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	About the cutting of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The following are the signs of the scrofula in the neck and on the shoulders, and some of them appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the following are those that happen in the neck, and all of them are born out of their own tunic, and therefore, as mentioned before.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The qualities of these scrofula are: some are little balls, and some contain moisture, and the malicious ones that do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So therefore in that which you see of good disposition in the Treatment, whose color of the water that is revealed is similar to the color of the grapeskin, and it is thin throughout all parts, and not attached to the nerves of the neck or to the veins, nor is it thick, cover that you draw over it with a thin cut from the edge on one side to the edge on the other side of the body of the skin of the line of B., and scrape it off entirely, and cut off two pieces from its edges with the shape of an onion, or cut off many small pieces if there is a need for them, as was said before in the chapter about the cuts on the head. And extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that it should not be drawn over a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And do not take blood or water that is not necessary to draw; because if you were to cut a vein or an artery and prevent your operation from continuing, the plague would stop, and you would have to wait until the pain of the swelling subsides and the plague softens and begins to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask the wise man if there is any remaining cause of those other small scrofula; so do those and clean them up.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the neck of a large vein, then do not draw that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you leave, draw that over with a strong rope and let it hang until it falls of itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the plague with fresh meat which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you draw that scrofula whole, then cover both lips of the plague with two layers until there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you think that there is still remaining superfluity because of the size of the scrofula, then cut its root and extract it, and then administer to it the sutura and water which has been said before.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofula that contain moisture, pierce them with a shallow cut here where the pus is seen coming out of it, and pause the piercing of those that are from the lower part of the body, as mentioned before.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer to them the piercing, similar to those that are already in a state of corruption; for it causes that the water which is there will corrode and be broken down.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Then when you see the plague has been cleaned up, then administer to it fresh meat that is generated; then cure it.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter.xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	About the cutting of an accidental swelling in the head.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They said that this section is about the epilepsy, and I have not seen such a person in our land who has done this.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon about those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in people it may be that the extraction of the epilepsy is avoided by using water, but all veins and arteries of the body are here; for it causes that it should not be extracted with water, or else it will kill you immediately.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have swollen patches in the mouth or in the ears or in both of them when the plague is not in the head, then use the cutting of epilepsy to avoid its destruction which is caused by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then when we want to drink water, let us draw the epilepsy from between three circles of the epilepsy, or four in a small section per length, that the cutting be done in the middle, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for the cutting, because it is deprived of meat, and the vessels of blood are easily cut.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the meat is little, then let you extend the grapekin of the ear to one centimeter; and then cut the grapekin through the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any remaining cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then let you draw it according to what I have told you; and it is shown on the section of the ear by the torchlight, which is from that eye which sees with water, and by the absence of blood.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the plague open for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then, when the hour is right, and the piercing is done, add two layers of grapekin to the ear of the plague, and cut it off as one piece, because it is cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that make the meat be healed within.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon which we have told you, is not otherwise than what you have seen, for some of these swollen patches already show the skull of the body; and the body has come to death, and its blood has clotted up; and some are going to pierce the epiglottis so that it does not suffocate the person at the place where the plague is, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by water command that the plague be left open until the evil of the plague is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; and then command it to do so, and cure that which can be healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And I have seen this for myself in my experience: one servant took a knife and cut into the patient's armpit, and another servant, taking a portion of cane from the pulse, inserted it into the wound; I was called to his aid, and at that moment I heard the sound of his moaning with pain, and discovered the plague and stopped the bleeding, which was being caused by the small plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I confessed that she had not cut a vein or made an incision, and the plague came out of her, and I cured it from within so that it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And did not hurt the servant, but after three days I returned to the improvement of her conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section on epilepsy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on apoplexy that occurs in the armpit, and is called a hernia of the armpit.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apoplexy, which is called a hernia of the armpit, is great according to the color of the body, and it happens in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways: either it is natural or it is accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	But in the natural one there is no hope of being cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is in two ways: one looks like grass nodules, and the other resembles an apoplexy that is caused by the rupture of an artery; and in this there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And I do not know that one should make a judgment about it without iron, but only in the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it closely and carefully: if it looks like grass nodules, and is not suspended from any vein, then cut those nodules off with a sharp knife, and extract them with water that comes out of her body; and if not, then examine all of her body thoroughly, and treat the place with water that comes out of her body so that she may be healed within.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on the spices of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodules have many types, and I have already spoken about all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I will tell you here the difference between a node and an eruption with a doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then I say that in an eruption there is heat and fever and violent pains, and it is complete putrefaction which, when the fever, pain, and heat are stopped, completes its course.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a nodule there is no heat or fever or pain, but it carries the lion or sack of itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a swelling, and it happens like this: either it has fat in it and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are different, as I have said in the division; or it is according to the following description.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And when you have reached the treatment of nodules, to avoid expelling it and to examine it carefully with a sharp instrument, according to the following description: for if it has the shape of a knot, then its treatment is close to this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way to examine apoplexies and all nodules: you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you suspect, little by little, until you feel that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally, with careful measurement of the size of the apoplexy, take out the sharp instrument and examine the tracks that it leaves; consider whether it is being caused by the small plague.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is lost in the course of running, of whatever color it may be, then you cut it on the surface according to what I have said about other apoplexies.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the tracks of the insertion, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on top without a form that resembles a knot according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as I have taught you, and tie it with a knot, and cut off the skin from all parts easily, and if you can, keep the hair or sack on it; then extract the snot from the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that snot, and many visible marks will be left; then you will extract them in pieces, so that they do not cause any trouble.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if it causes any trouble, whether little or much, the nodule returns according to its type.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that it causes any small part to break off, then completely burn the plague of some sharp corrosive powder, and press strongly on the area that is apoplexy, and heal it with another treatment within which may be healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large nodule, then you cut it in two places and heal it with water that comes out of it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is pulsating to it, or not pulsating, then you stop bleeding and apply a dry cloth to the place that has been cut three times a day until the plague disappears and the fever stops; and then return to cutting it, because it is like a knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter.xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the necessary shapes of instruments in section and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The forms of insertion are three: one is large, another is medium, and the third is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The large form of insertion is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The medium form of insertion is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small form of insertion is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	If the instrument is sharp, or blunt, or both, it must be well balanced, in order that it may easily enter into the apoplexies.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the shapes of experience: they are not many, and one of them is called drinking.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	The three shapes are: large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large experience is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium experience is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small experience is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is agreed that those are apoplexies, and that they are caused by the bubbles that rise from the bones; and for other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are round, large, and with sharp points, and they are made of wool that is sewn on, and they are made of citronwood, or iron, or silver; and the majority are made of ironwood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And those experiences are black feathers, which agree that they cause the fistulas to open in the cavities where they reflect, and reflect on their own surface.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	The three shapes are: long, medium, and short; according to the amount of width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of a large experience of lead is this:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The shape of a medium experience of lead is this:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The shape of a small experience of lead is this:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the knots are of various types, for some have only one curve; and there are three shapes: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they are knots that grow larger, and there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The knots that have two curves, and there are three shapes.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they are knots that have three curves, and there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple knot is this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a medium simple knot is this:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a single simple dose, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a single large dose:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a small single dose, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small single dose, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large dose that has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a small dose that has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small single dose that has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large dose that has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small dose that has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small single dose that has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels I have, with which I cut and scratch knots and warts; and they are of three sizes, one large, one medium, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of them with which the section is made are sharp and the other ends are not sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is done quickly in the excorciation of the knots the fear of incising a vein or a nerve, and by doing this the patient is healed and also has great peace through the adjustment by which the wart is removed.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the ointments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, thus:
La forma de magda gran:	Form of a large ointment:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium ointment:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small ointment:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When it is caused by cold and has the appearance of rawness, and it is made with alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And on the other side, with a pointed spatula hidden with ointment, and in that split second, as you wish, thus:
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulas, which are rubbed between the thighs and cause the warts to pierce, and do not feel the pain, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of them:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the veils with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three kinds; large, medium, and small; the forms of the foot:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	When it is caused by cold and has the appearance of citrus, round in shape and a certain length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these, of the three kinds of veils, should be large, medium, and small, so that by their stopping the flow of blood quickly, as needed, and when you first begin, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to stop the blood from flowing all over the body, but only in fleshly places, that is, in the creases of the legs and thighs, and in the creases of the arms, and of the nipples and abdomen and thighs, and resembling them, in the fleshly places, with humors.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some veils are made of these other instruments, small in size, resembling scalpel-like scours of skin according to this form; for by doing so the blood is stopped when done with bloodletting or an incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veils are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	For the treatment of male nipples that are made from women's breasts.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veils are inflated to the nipples of old men with a certain amount of sleep, and then they are inflated, and the nipples of women are assembled, and Roman adustios, big.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to anyone who desires it, I will show how to incise those that are caused by the moon according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G; and then cut out all the groesomeness, and also apply the plague of medicine made up, and also adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and heal that which is within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple sags and is softened by its magnitude, then it is cut in two halves above, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each of which contains the other within itself; that is, the major section contains the minor according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G. And then cut out the codeness that is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and also give the medicine that has been said about suturing and powders, whatever is necessary in the treatment; and heal it.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not approve of incising that which is caused by the trouble of the patient, and of the flow of blood, then you should use a plague of medicine made up of a certain amount of vinegar, and then cut out that which is corroded by it; that is, it is cut off from the grayish part, and heal that which is within.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the piercing of warts that come from below to the tip.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those warts that come from below to the tip are of the kinds of scrofula and dura; they contain a certain pus that is drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture; and those that contain pus, are incised according to this lunar section figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when it is completely emptied of water that is found in the wart of the scrofula, then you should remove the cot yvel and leave the wound open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And let the cot remain so and be healed with a certain amount of vinegar that is suitable to it, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the wart of the nodules is, and of scrofula, then you should cut it according to what has been said in the section about scrofula above.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is extended in ash that is burned, then administer it according to what has been said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of warts that come from artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the codeness is solid that is above it, then see the veils of warts that come from there according to the section: because when a wart comes through an artery, it is long and agregate in the preon of the body; and when you hear the stridor of a wart with the tips of fingers, you feel its pain.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which enters by way of the veins returns to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And it is error to make the section over this apoplexy, and chiefly in that which remains the anus, and in the throat, and in other places of the body; and it is great, when its cure must be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, must also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And above that which is of it by way of the inflations of the orifice of the artery, make a long section; and approach the cut with knives and separate the artery, and free it from the tunics, so that it may be discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And approach a needle on that and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double knot in two places; — which causes you to have great pain when you extract two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And approach the place that is between two ligaments with a knife into it so as not to harm the santum, and dissolve the apoplexy.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And approach with a cure that is generated within so as not to harm the ligaments, and heal that with water convenient for healing within.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an apoplexy from the section of a vein, then you must have in your hand water that is at your possible of the apoplexy with the cord, and approach the needle below the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be it in that double thread within which you extract that of the other side, and bind the apoplexy with a single ligament according to what I have said before concerning the ligament of the veines of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you are afraid to extract the thread, then approach the double thread with a needle below all the apoplexy; and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And approach to dry the apoplexy in its place within so as not to harm water that is in it, and then cut off the surplus of the cord, and leave the water that is in it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place on it the palm of your hand, which you have dipped in oil and water, and approach to administer the cure that is done with water and oil within so as not to harm it, and make it heal.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	It is a capital apoplexy that happens from the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	As apoplexy from an artery and a vein, and resembling that which happens in the percussion of nerves or by excessive work, and resembling them.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is made more often on the sides of the helpers or of the neck, or at all places where joints are bent.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a hard apoplexy, and is like the color of another body, and in its main dispositions it is from within, and when it is strident with violence, it causes the patient to be like a stupefied person.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an apoplexy from the front of the body, and for this reason the cord is left behind, and it bends all over; it does not bend forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So water from those which is in the joints must not be allowed to flow away by way of a pipe, because it would force strongly against it.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And that which is in the head or in the forehead with a knife.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a little apoplexy, then approach to the roots and cut that off of the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then suspend it with a hook, and remove that one, and fasten the other one; and patch up the wound with sutures, and heal that within.
Capitol .li.	Here I stop.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of an apoplexy that you cause from the mouth to the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And put on all the men whose bellies are swollen and other parts of their bodies that are like mushrooms, of which the roots are thin and the heads are large; and those whose lips are swollen, and who are small.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly were two mushrooms that seemed similar, and there was no difference between them, having thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those men were turned inside out, and moisture ran from them at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I cut off those men and turned over in bed eighteen times. and the other one was five inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And consider that the patient is moist when you operate on him with a knife, and that his color is white, moist, and has thin roots; then approach to cut off a part of it with a knife in front of you, and if he bleeds, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is a little afraid and anxious, do not cut him with steel; but approach to hold a piece of fresh lead, and tighten it on the part that has been pointed out, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And approach to tighten the thread of lead; then, do not cut it with a sharp edge, or it will be torn and fall from its place by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the lead is of large roots, then in the cutting of it there is a cause of fear and anxiety, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	And perhaps you might cut off the tip of it, and approach to cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then approach to heal the wound within.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful that you do not cut off a piece of lead that is of a dark color, with little feeling and without regard; for that part will be cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I was reminded of a previous error.
Capitol .lii.	Here I stop.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of cure for the umbilical prominence.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The prominence of the umbilical is done for different reasons: or because of fissures in the navel which are over the belly, and from which the skin or intestines come out; or because blood flows from a vein or artery according to whether it comes from the front or back.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And if it is because of a tear in the navel and the intestines come out, then the color of the apoplexy resembles that of the body; and it is a sharp pain, and you can see different situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is because of the escape of the intestines, then you can see different situations with him who has been told about it, and if you press that one hard with your fingers, he will return; and a sharp pain comes up to his belly.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is because of moisture, then it is a sharp pain and does not remain hidden when you press it with your hand; neither is it forced back or released.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is blood, then these signs appear: the apoplexy turns black and declines towards the back.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is because of meat, then the apoplexy is hard, thick, and long; it clings to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is because of wind, then touch from him is sharp.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And consider that the operation on it is that if the prominence of the umbilical is because of blood from an artery or vein, or wind; then you are prohibited from curing it, for in that case there is fear and anxiety; so you are taught in the chapter in which it has been said that apoplexies from the artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the umbilical prominence is for the intestine or hernia, then cover that you command the patient to lie down and remain still; and approach to try in the course of all the umbilical, and command him that he stays towards between your hands on his back, and approach circles a needle sharp in the course of the umbilical over the place that you have sent am to the attempt; and approach extend the most part of the abscess on the parts below with a big unction; and approach tie in the course at a strong rope or at a string and the method of tying decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And approach cut the most part of the abscess extended on the tissue and introduce the needle in that hole and try the intestine; and if you have not hit it or kept by the tissue, then you take off quickly and push the intestine into the parts inside of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have hit the hernia, then take that one with a big needle; and cut the superfluity of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May if it is contrary to your fire or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put those two strings strong and introduce two needles in the course that you have made around the abscess in a manner of cutting, which pass to penetrate; and approach tighten the abscess on the four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, take away the needles and leave the place inside that it can heal the flesh extended and fall by itself; or cut that point when it has become thin and then treat that with water that covers the tissue inside that it is cured.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the umbilical prominence is of flesh or moisture, then cover that you cut the abscess as well as I have said and destroy the flesh or moisture, which you have hit, and approach treat that with water that covers and cures the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 3.ll.
De curacio de cranc.	Of treatment of bones.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	You have already said, in the division, of special types of bones and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is easily damaged by treatment without causing an ulcer; and you have said that bone is born in the greatest and most careful way for the treatment of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said to the small ones that some broken bones are in a place where it is possible to remove them completely, thus when of bone that is in the nipples or in the crotch and similar parts of the members allocated to extract everything, and especially when it starts little.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	May if it is old and large, then do not approach to it, for I have not seen how to heal such an ulcer nor have I seen another, nor that it has come out into water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is allocated in this way as I have said, that you proceed and leave the patient and flush out some diarrhea, and approach heal that one, if it has hit him clearly.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And approach prepare the patient for the preparation in which it is located for the operation, and approach predict in the trail uncin what you cover on that; and approach cut from all parts with a sharp knife good excretion until it does not cause any reason of its wounds.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And leave run the water, and do not let that dripping, and squeeze the places, and wipe the water from the hand or from the instrument which is at your disposal of the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if it causes a contrario of the thick water of a vein or an artery, then make a cauterization on that until the flow of the water stops, and approach heal that one with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4.l.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already said, in the division, of special types of dropsy with water, and the characteristics of each type, how to treat them with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured with iron is not but the type of gout alone, and does not approach to cure the type of tympanic or to the type of hypophyra, because water is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of gout with medicines and do not give the medicine to the patient, then consider that if the gout has been conquered, or is another type of gout, as if it is in the throat or abdomen and similar to these, then keep away from giving it iron because fear is about water.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May if you see the patient of great virtue, and is another illness but gout only, and is not child or old man, then the way to operate on him is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the minister approaches him and squeezes his belly with his hand, pushing water out from the part of the neck, and approach take a sharp knife according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	is of two sharp points long, of a sharp point at each end, as well as a knife; but however short it is, little by little, in order that during the operation on him you do not pass into the bowels, and that you cut off that one.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And approach consider that if the generation of gout is of part of the bowels, because then you cut away from the umbilical for the quantity of three fingers from the bottom, on the right side of it over the neck.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	May if the generation of gout is by a disease of the feet, then your section is on the left side of the umbilical for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is by the mother's milk, then your section is on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Do not cover that your section is on the back on which you want to work with the patient so that the superfluities do not run into that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And approach pierce with the instrument all of it, and approach introduce in that section, and raise your hand to the knife between the cut and the syringe, and you squeeze off that one; and if the quantity is a little.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And approach pierce the syringe until it reaches the knife to the desired place, and that is the water place.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And approach take that one away and introduce an instrument which has this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a silver tube thin; it is made of silver or brass or lead, which has in the part of the bottom a little hole, and on the sides two holes: one from the top and another from the bottom; and it is finished with feather-like points, as well as you sometimes do:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	It is in the extreme of it, a ring, because when the instrument touches water, then that one immediately rises on top of the instrument, so it evacuates the water in half a quantity, because if you evacuate from it more than not to hit it in the hour, then it breaks strongly the patient by the resolution of his animal spirit, or happens to him five times approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And evacuates from that second quantity of the virtue of it and second what you mean in your dispositions of the patient's virtue of his pulse and goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And approach take away the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it because it is held back by theコード that holds the hole that is on the syringe over which you have said to pierce that one according to this method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And approach repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates water, and approach take out a little water, and make it run for a long time over fear, and keep away from making a mistake in which it does not run into water but little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	May if you fear for the patient, then leave out a large quantity of water, and approach heal that one in a dry sand, and make him drink some water, and expect on the sun long time; and approach heal that one with desiccating medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the mattress and fit it near the extraction of water, according to what I have told in it that is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter. V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with holes in the places of urine do not perforate.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some are born with the head of their mixture not perforated (or is straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then let us treat with the perforation of it so soon as it is born with a subtle touch according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place in the throat a small platinum nail and tie it on, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him stand and urinate; then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the platinum, the urine that goes over the place, does not allow this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May the one of the throat that is straight be treated with a platinum nail, so as it has been said, for several days until it is increased.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those who are in the throat not in their place, be led out, which causes it to be because of those, that is born with the throat, the end of the penis per so that it cannot urinate at the base, within that it raises the penis to its base at the basis; and it is not for its generation, for so the semen cannot come to the mother according to its rectitude, and it is a disease of the body.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the way of operation in it is that the patient be wrapped over his back, and place the end of the penis with your left hand to a violent extraction, and cut the top of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp blade, or so that you do not cut any part, for so the blood of it comes out similar to the end of the penis, and the throat falls into its place according to what has been said.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And keep in mind that when you operate to stop the flow of blood, because it may happen to you; and pause it until the blood stops flowing, and heal the plague within that if it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter. LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the treatment of the skin that occurs in the tip of the penis and of the corruption and blackness and adhesiveness of the skin of the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The skin that is born with it occurs in the penis and is an eminence of slow-growing flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one is malignant and another is not-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, let us suspend with a small oil and cut off that within it is all; then place it on the edge of Egyptian ointment; then put that, heal with it the next day until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the skin is malignant, of a dark color, then let us treat with a pointed cauterization near its cutting.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May if the skin that is born in the tip of the penis is not circumcised, and one part of the skin is inside and the other part is outside, then let us treat with the skin that is inside at the beginning until it is hardened; and then let you heal the outside, because when you heal the outside with ointment, it is not assured that it has been cut.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it occurs in the genitals and in the skin that is black and corrupted, then let us treat all of what has been darkened and is beginning to corrupt or has been corrupted; then place a line of this on it with milk of sour dough and dried herbs and seeds.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then heal it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May if there is a flow of blood from the penis, then administer a lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because cauterization that is younger can be done in two positions together, as it is for the flow of blood from the penis and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corrupted and is destroyed completely in the hour, then let us enter into the meat of the penis with a platinum tube so that the bad urine passes through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the skin to the tip of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that for which the skin is tight, and when it occurs because of plague or pustule) then let you draw out with a sharp blade within that it is dissolved the flesh and released the tip of the penis completely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them carefully, then let you draw out with a sharp blade any cause of the tip of the penis and of the skin, for it is because the skin is thin, it is easily pierced by the skin's subtleness gently.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate between the skin and the tip of the penis with a small blade, which is already wet with water to prevent it from adhering again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then let it be treated with a vi stiptic within that it is hardened.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter. LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleaning of children and of the treatment of that which occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not only a solution for continence but also for other plagues: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and its way is heavier to save those who are lost in order to achieve salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Then I say that the little children do not say circumcision in some of the free nations, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which causes me to admire most of the craftsmen and barbers who practice circumcision and purification with a sharp blade; and they use an ointment and cut with a scalpel.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all of these ways and did not find a better purification with scissors or an ointment that is used in purification with a scalpel because the cord of the skin of the penis has two tunics, and the thread remains above them, and it is easily cut; and it is difficult to force another cutting and is painful.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	In the purification that is done by alpeceating, and it is a digital one, which is used by barbers, is not secure to cut the end of the penis because it is difficult to enter into the throat of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	May in the operation with a scalpel, it is difficult to force and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and the skin that is born with it occurs in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May from the purification that is done with scissors and an ointment, the goodness, experiment shows me, because the scissors are of proportional cutting, for in the sharpness that it is above is as such as in the sharpness that it is below; then let you press your hand with a proportional sharp blade, and cut according to a comparison at a time; then make a compression of the scrotum containing the cord of the penis completely, which does not have any error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you make wait the child completely if it is one of those who understand a small one, so that you do not make lie the scrotum on its penis at all times, and let it sleep that night.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then place joy in all those ways that are possible for him to accept your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And make him sit between your two knees, properly prepared, and not let the child see those or any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And put your hand around the boy's throat and blow into the tube, and pull out that which is stuck in there, and clean it off with water.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And tie the thread tightly around the second knot, and make a little loop on it, and put your finger on that loop, and keep your finger there so as to prevent the knot from coming out again; then sew between two knots.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And lift up the tube slightly, and pull out the knot; then let it down again; then make a little cut with a sharp knife, for that is better; and sprinkle powder on it and over the powder place a cloth in which there is some olive oil; then leave him there until the next day; and care for him in the manner described above until he is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is the shape of the scissors for cleaning:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The tips of the scissors should not be sharp and the other ends should be sharp, so that the bar at the end does not hurt; and make the length of the two handles equal to each other with the same length of the blades when they are closed together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleaning is that a long time may elapse before all the foreign matter has gone; or some of it may be pushed deep into the tube and difficult to remove.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So when you put your hand out in front of you with your thumb up, you must hold the tube at a right angle to it and make the second cut at an equal distance from that.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it up with your thumb, then take it out with a finger and make the cut.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if it has been three days, and the tube remains inflated, then leave it as it is until it deflates, and then make the second cut with ease, and clean that one which you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep your hand away from the end of the tube, for it will not be nice to touch.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so care for him with water that the plague is removed by the powder which we have described in the treatise on powder.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been cut too much from the tube, and you follow the instructions for making it smaller again, then it will not be nice to touch.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But care for him with water that we have said is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the Treatment of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to fear or a sudden cold, or from bad diet or too much meat, and similar things which we have said regarding the methods of treatment in the Division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and if it has come to a head in the bladder, then make the patient sit on his heels.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And make the feet of the patient point towards each other and spread his legs wide, and contract his belly as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the contraction which causes the passing of urine from behind, so that it passes completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved by the treatment which we have described, then make an instrument called a syringe, whose shape is as follows: it should be made of silver and very fine leather; and the tube should be like a long palm tree in shape, with a small hole at the end, like a needle point; and the leather should be fine.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of introducing urine by means of the syringe is this: first put the loop of the thread around your finger and tie it firmly; then insert the end of the tube into the opening of the bladder, and make a small cut with the scissors if any of the leather should become loose; but first insert the end of the tube with force into the bladder.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And put him on the bed, and wrap his bladder in cloth and oil; and oil of olive and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And insert the syringe with ease into the opening of the tube; then double the end of the tube over itself at the end of the bladder; then push the needle into that point; and push it in as far as the cause allows, and no further; but if it is difficult to push it further, do not force it, but leave it as it is.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And remove the thread from around your finger little by little, for urine causes the leather to contract.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove that and use the treatment of urine; and use the syringe, not to force further urine out, but to relieve the bladder and ease the pain.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the Qualities of Bladder Clamping with a Clamp and Similar Instruments Which Agree with Water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When a ulcer or pus, or a sudden cold, comes to the bladder, and you wish to distil water and medicine into it, then use an instrument called a clamp, and its shape is this:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	It should be loud at one end, but silent at the other, so that it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three openings: two of a size and shape similar to each other; and thirdly, which is smaller.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a closed shape, in which water is absorbed; and then, according to the quantity that collects there, some of it is thrown out with the wind; and when it is expelled, all of it is thrown out; and when it is expelled far away, according to how tightly it is closed.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Then when you wish to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the water; and throw out with the wind the water which collects in the cavity of the clamp; for the water is thrown out with the wind from the hollow part of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the end of the clamp into the tube according to what we have said in the description of the syringe; and push the moisture into it with force, for that moisture will reach the bladder very quickly, and relieve the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the small clamp which is used to tighten the bladder, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or leather, the end being like a small feather, and the leather being fine inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then put the bladder in motion, and keep the moisture which you wish to tighten in the bladder; and place that end of the tube between two strong knots of the thread, and heat that moisture over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And insert the end of the clamp into the tube.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture which you wish to tighten, and make it spread out from that point, so that the moisture is completely absorbed by the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you do not have a bladder, then make a ring with a piece of string and pierce it throughout; and insert the end of the tube into that hole; then put the ring on tightly around your waist; then turn yourself round and roll so as to pass the tube over your body several times; and then remove the tube and place it in water, and oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then take that instrument and do as you have done to the bladder; and express the liquid into the bladder with your hand, so that the moisture passes into it.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra.	On Extraction of Stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division about the species of stone and the treatment with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the lungs and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have spoken about the stone that is operated on and cut out.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I shall now set forth that which has been spoken, clearly and concisely.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is passed from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; and the patient's testicles are drawn up, and there are visible motes, and it is dressed with a cloth; and it causes a stinging in the scrotum from those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to cure children from that entrapment which they have acquired by the age of twelve; and it is difficult to treat the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, half is cured by water, because it is among those who are affected.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; and if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, since we have arrived at the cure of that disease, let us begin with what has been mentioned about the patient' s intestines; for that fissure, some motes prevent the entrance of the stone by inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And let the patient' s intestines be placed between his legs and bound and pressed together that the stone may descend into the bladder, or jump from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make a cut between your breasts prepared, and the breasts of him are placed on one side, so that the entire bladder is turned towards the side where it is.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then he makes a turn with his hand.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in that space, immediately lie down on your side and cut it off.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not completely release his treatment from both sides, immediately stop and apply oil to the patient' s tongue with the left hand, if the patient is a child, or to the right side if he is a grown man, and insert it into his scrotum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And turn the stone within that space which is on one side of him.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn the stone little by little within the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon it with your hand and push out that stone to one side away from the place where you made the cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press his hand upon his bladder; and order another minister that he extend his testicles towards the sides from his right hand, and with his left hand he pulls back the skin where you have made the cut.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert your finger in an oblique manner into that place where this is done:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then cut in it with water that is between the testicles and the genitals, not at the front of the patient' s scrotum, but behind, cutting transversely so that the cut on one side is broad and straight according to the amount of stone which has been passed into the bladder, and no more, because if the patient' s hand presses very hard upon his bladder, it may be that the stone will come out through the cut without a cut being made.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is no stone which is difficult to extract by water, because its extraction becomes difficult by water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that water is like a lion' s tongue, and it is round, and its extraction is more difficult by water.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that stone which is difficult to extract, arrange it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily extracted in this way, immediately stop and apply pressure to it with your hand, or stretch it gently by holding it between your hands, so that the end of it is turned towards you, and do not let go; or insert a very thin instrument with a curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	In addition, if you cannot apply pressure to it with your hand, immediately increase the stretch a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it off with three-sided vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	In addition, if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning of the process, press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it off; and then press a little water upon it; and if there are any motes, cut them off little by little.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, at the beginning of the process, ignore that it has been cut off with a large cut, for two reasons: either because it will be very painful to him, or because the location is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	In addition, administer to him a medicine that will cause a discharge from within, or arrange the fracture of it with a scissor within so that the stone is taken out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, immediately fill the cup with herb of aloe and dragon' s blood, and stretch it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And then cover that cloth upon which you have operated with oil of roses and water, or with rose water and a little soap, so that it may be easily washed away.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then remove the patient' s clothes from his scrotum, and do not wash the wound within three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have taken off the bandages, immerse the wound in water and a little oil, and then clean it with pure vinegar and a little hydrogen peroxide within, so that he is cured.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	In addition, if there is an apostema from within that is sharp and corrosive, and it seems as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of this, it causes the patient' s pain, and to prevent the bladder from being destroyed by rot, immediately insert the patient' s hand into the wound, and remove the stone, because it causes the blood to flow away from the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with water and salt, and in opposition to all species, with water that is like tears, so that it may be easily cured within.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And in the hours after your operation, put on both the bandages and apply the medicines which you have prepared upon it.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is lodged in the scrotum, and it causes a lack of urine, immediately cure it with water that has been prepared in advance before you cut, because it is difficult to extract by surgery; because there are ten motes, which prevent the extraction of it, and this is the form of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a curved tip, sharp, and lodged in a tube.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then hold fast, and draw away from the patient' s scrotum that stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the scrotum, piercing with ease within, in order to pierce that stone with an iron which has been prepared for that purpose.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then turn the iron around in that small stone little by little, and you will pierce that stone from one side to the other through which the urine passes; because it is quickly lost.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand upon it that is like a bow from which the stone has been cut off on one side of the scrotum, because it is sharp, and it is difficult to extract by urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	In addition, if this cure is not appropriate for him because of some reason which you have mentioned, immediately hold the patient' s scrotum away from that stone, and then place upon it another scrotum.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut along the line in that corner between two threads.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then remove that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then cut away the ligament and wash away the blood, which is made in the groin.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the bowstring so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other string above so that when the bowstring is cut, the bladder returns to its place and no blood is lost.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary to tie the bowstring above so that the bladder does not return to its place and then cut it again, lifting the bladder back up or returning it to its place and no blood is lost.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXVI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of the bladder from the groin.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	The bladder in the groin is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if there is a bladder at any of those places, then it is difficult to cure it, and it is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their ways is because the strong woman's leg is tense.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a good woman who discovers whether she has eaten meat when she is pure, or whether she is married to a man.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not have good women who know this art, mostly the operation above all.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the place of section over the bladder in the groin is far from the place of the bladder, so that it does not suffer from a heavy section, and then it is feared.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do this with water, then take a married woman who knows this art well, and it is rare to find one.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that one, then seek a married woman who is learned and subtle, or present a widow well-versed in the art of women, or a woman who knows this art in the midst of women's affairs.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then present that one, and command her to do whatever you order, from the inquiry about the bladder to the beginning; which causes her to keep her vows secret, so that she does not want the bladder to come out.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if that one is angry, remove that one from your orders, and then command her to pierce herself.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not pure, then command the widow to put her left hand on the bladder, and pierce herself with a good needle.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	And if that one is angry, then it is desired that she grumpily withdraw her left hand from the bladder's orifice at its root before she pierces herself with a needle.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then pierce her on the orifice of the bladder from the back of the neck towards the front, so that it is stopped in that place and the bladder is pushed in that corner, and her words are not disturbed by the pain of the piercing.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section be short at first; and then insert the ray on that section, and if she feels the bladder, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know the bladder will go out of that place.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the spices of the bladder are small: because some are little and big, and sharp and round, and there are hills.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you knew how many spices there were in it, so that you would not make a mistake in your calculation of the quantity that you meant to measure with water.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to see the blood flowing, then adjust in that virulent place and stretch it for three hours, and then return to your operation before the bladder is discharged.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the instruments that are described in the extraction of the bladder in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to see the blood flowing, and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the orifice where the needle pierces, then pause the powder on that place and then apply it with a duster and tighten it slightly, and do not repeat water; and leave the bladder, and do not extract that one, because the man will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the foot.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the sharpness of the pain decreases gradually, that place softens, then return to your operation before the bladder is discharged.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On Section over hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia that is caused by moisture being added to the skin is what is left of the genitals containing the water, and it is called cyphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some vealed are in the proper pannicol, which is what nature prepares at the root of the water, so that it is what it is, and not water; and it is the coden of the genitals between the skin, which we have called cyphac, and not water.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by the loss of blood, which happens to the genitals, so that that matter is discharged there, and sometimes it is caused by a blow struck on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is not colored, for the color of it is declining to yellow or bloody, or dark and ropy, or black and boiled, or clear and fresh water, and that is what it is made of.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this addition of water is known: because if it is in cyphac, which we have said, then the swelling is round and declining a little towards length as well as the figure of a cow, and there are the genitals, because moisture contains them all.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper pannicol, then the swelling is round at the root of the water, and so it is thought to be another cow, and so that man estimates that it is another cow.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the coden of the genitals and cyphac, then the temperature decreases.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling, then examine the shape of the orifice from which it comes, and judge from that what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to heal him with water, then it is desired that the dog be thirsty if water is possible, and fill his bowl with water.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then it should be lifted up on its two feet for a little while, and then remove the blankets from it.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow your orders on the right side of him, which causes his arm to stretch out from his shoulder as if he were going to reach for something at the root of the genitals, and then presents the wonder of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a spoon, and cut the coden of the genitals from its place by its length, and then return it to its place, so that the genitals are not cut off.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then the section be made according to the rule of joining together the edges of the genitals, so that it covers the skin completely.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then wash that one, and observe it, and keep it in mind so that you do not pierce that one; and your washing of it be careful, for the purpose is to suspend it from its root slightly higher than the water level, and carefully examine the washing according to the quantity that you are able.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce cyphac thoroughly with water by a wide piercing, and then extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two sections of the section by a nail, and then stretch cyphac from above; and do not touch the genitals together, and cut cyphac with a sharp knife in the way that is convenient for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut the whole of it or in pieces, and more importantly its thin layer, because if you don’t examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water won’t return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the patient’s pain comes from cold humors that have infiltrated each part of their body, and pain occurs in their feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the patient’s pain is caused by another disease, then know that you must remove the vessels that are hanging from the suspenders, and extract them, and then treat it with water as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is gathered in two parts, know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to how you have done it in the other incision; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then rinse the wound and immerse it in oil or rosin; and place another cloth on top of it, and spread the powder on top of that, and place a towel over it, folded up, and put a cloth on top of it, which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and humph them with wool according to this appearance; and make the extremities tight with a cloth or wet wool, and join them to the belt of the shorts, and one extremity should be put between the other, and the second between the crotch, and both extremities on top of two thrones, and all the tightness is adjusted in the belt of the shorts.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some of these hernias are treated artificially by cauterization instead of surgery to remove them; and it is because you take a sharp knife and cut the codena of the genitalia, and burn it according to what we have said before, until you discover the white ciphe that contains the water, and then you make cauterization according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is formed like a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that ciphe, and burn it so that all the moisture leaves it.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then tear the ciphe with nails, and scrape it with a sharp nail, and burn it with a burning cauterization; and cut that according to what is possible for you, so that you remove all of it; and guard against the fire of the cauterization.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and further away from flowing blood than surgery by incision; and better than operation by incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if it causes you pain during the incision or during cauterization or bleeding, then know that you must treat what causes you pain by this method that is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	And if the patient is a little bit afraid and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer cauterization according to what we have said before; and it is when it is proven that it is an aqueous hernia.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And then know that you must place the patient on a raised platform; and pierce the abscess at its lowest point with a needle, and make the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	and it is the wide opening where all the water comes out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand on the area and cut that, so that all the water comes out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it in such a way that the illness is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if there is a reaction to the extraction of water in that hour you pierce it: and it is not done except by what we have said before because the white pannicle in the orifice of the wound makes pain and prevents the entry of water; then know that you must introduce into the wound a liquid instrument with which to extract water from the droplets, its shape being preceded; or place something small on the edge of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is collected within a few months or years; and when it is gathered, then pierce it according to that method of manual injection, because the disease will last its time.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXVI.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Incision on Chronic Hernia and the Treatment of It.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in surgery on this hernia is a lost cause to turn into a chronic illness; but for me, it is seen that its removal and being saved by it is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on her and the spices of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then know that the abscess arises in the bodies where the genitalia are joined, and it is caused by various factors: or because of acute excess of water in the body, which is spread in the genital area; or because of impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it does not hurt in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And there is a very hard abscess that islapified, whose color is dark, and does not feel to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some are caused by the swelling of the intestines, and by the inflation of the veins; and it is seen that this is an abscess because of the previous remembrance of it, or by the inflammation of the blood vessels.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And that which is caused by the swelling of the intestines is known by the spread of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it is not known that it hurts when touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And that which is caused by the swelling of veins is not spread because of the pressure exerted on them with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type of hernia surgery should be performed and on other parts of the body; and it is because you cut the codena of the genitalia, and then separate them from each other, and extract the white ciphe that contains the water, and tie up the vessels, and cut them, and cut those according to what we have said before.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the hernia is already firmly established on those parts of the body, then know that you must extract the hernia and cut it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion anywhere for any reason between the ciphe and between the veins, then know that you must free all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is a birthmark in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then know that you must cut all of it and extract the hernia as we have said before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with infused sheep's wool in rose oil and water; and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the Treatment of Hernia that is due to a lack of water.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	There is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper resembling a budge from the testicles, and it is difficult to perform movement exercise or walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness is due to fear about which there is a remembrance of it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, know that I will speak about the operation on her according to what we have said before.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you must place the patient on a raised platform; and then suspend the testicles between two ties; and then pull the codenas of the genitalia with your fingers in such a way that they do not touch the side of the patient's body; and hold them like that, and extend those to the extreme with vehemence.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then cut the spinal cord in half, cutting it from side to side through the vessels where they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove the entire arteria all at once, as you have already said in the section about cutting the arteries from the temple.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those a needle which is doubled up at the end, and tie this thread at the first spot where it occurs, and another one on the other side.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then cut these in half crosswise according to the length of the body, and extract what is attached to the putrid and corrupt fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the plague with the cure for other plagues in which you want to heal it so that the vessels do not break, otherwise they will rupture one of the two genitals, because this is not good for it.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if all of the vessels are cut off, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that they are severed from the vessels by themselves, so that they lack all nourishment through the section of the vessels, and wither away, or that they are removed so that they do not increase in size.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Cure for Hernias Caused by Intestines.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that has broken out on the abdomen from one side of the navel to the other, so that these intestines break out from it; and because of this, some of the intestines come out.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This break is either from the navel or from an exit; and these two things happen for different reasons: either because of a strike, or because of a loud noise, or because of a sudden sound, or because of some other heavy cause, or because of a resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it happens little by little over a long period of time, and not suddenly; and it is a swelling inside the navel, pressing against the intestine, for the navel compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is that it happens when the navel splits open, for at the beginning it causes a violent pain suddenly; and it is a swelling that appears different in appearance near the navel, and the body breaks apart at the split of the navel.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some are overlooked when the intestine comes out of its cloth, and this is called the hernia inguinalis internal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some are made of a vent in the cloth, and some run in a split in the intestine, and here it is held, and from it comes great pain to the patient, and some make the pain worse and more intense when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of hernias with force, it must be remembered that the cure should not cause pain; so that it is covered from the side where it is being treated.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on this is that you order to the patient that he return the intestine to its cavity if it comes out, and place your hand on his chest between his breasts, and raise the legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then cut the string that ties the testes together at the top, and cut the string of the testes completely; and then place two knives on the section according to how you want to cut it for them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if, after the section, there is a hole that has been overlooked, then it is necessary to close it with a thread.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the navel string from the testes, leaving the navel cord exposed on both sides; and cut it completely so that there is no navel cord left.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then cut the string of the testes, which is between the navel strings, leaving only the navel cord that has already broken open; and leave the attachment that is at the back of the navel intact.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then cut the string of the testes on both sides, and extend the navel cord on its left side up to the navel with your hand; and order the minister to bring the testicles up there and completely dissolve the attachment that is at the back.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And ask with the help of the tools whether there is any cause for the navel to be wrapped in the hard navel cord.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you do not find a reason for it, then you will find it inside.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take an unusually thick needle, and thread it through twice the number of threads that you can get; and then cut both ends of the needle, and make a knot on each end so that it does not break; and tie this knot tightly on both sides of the navel; and then make a series of knots in the shape of a cross over it; and cut off the ends of the string.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you wrap the ends of the string around those things tightly; and tie this thread around those with a sharp knot, so that none of the vessels break which are attached to them, so that nothing causes an swelling here, so that it does not cause swelling.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another thread around the navel in line with the first thread, which is three times as long; and then place these two threads on the navel, leaving a portion of it; and cut off the ends of this string from both sides, so that they do not touch each other; and tie them tightly.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut the navel cord from side to side with a sharp knife, and make a hole in it; and tie this thread tightly so that it does not break.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer a hot liquid; and place the needle in the plague; and tie the string that we have described (and sometimes the hard navel cord is cauterized, which we have mentioned as a precaution against bleeding, because some occur) and leave the thread inside it.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the cure is delayed, then it should be boiled; and place it on the navel in the way that has been said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And this plague is cured with another cure for the plagues in which it is to be healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On the Cure for a Windy Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been done on it with respect to healing it with force.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	First they said that this is done in the same way as we have described in the hernia caused by wind; which is that you cut the vessels from side to side with ease; and then dry them out in the middle, removing all the swelling; and let them fall; so that the vessels do not break.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And this plague is cured according to what we have said, so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the Dropping that Occurs in the Intestines.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some drop out of the intestines in this way as we have said, and it comes out.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	It does not cause pain to the genitals when the intestines come out; and if it does, it is little; and it returns in an instant.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if this time is prolonged, it causes a break in the navel through which the intestines come out into the navel; and then this happens to the navel as we have said, which is caused by the navel string being extended; and then the place softens, and the swelling increases, and it comes out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for this is with a sharp knife as we have mentioned before it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some are cured with force according to this method: and it is that the patient jumps on his back between your breasts, and then dry out the place of the swelling caused by the discharge with a section according to the number three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then tighten the white cloth that lies under the chest until it is tight.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rope and place it over the immediate location of the cord, and press it against the navel.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two locations immediately above the end of the rope of the cord, and join one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the rope, and do not cut off any of the cord, nor let the skin spread out, nor for any other reason should you know about the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of pus, and when you cut the strings, clean it and restore the hernia within so that it does not break out; for the cord is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	A cauterization is better in this place, since it is closer to being saved.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxxxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In certain men, the testicles are softened by it because the meat that is between them is softened, and one should observe this.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then, for the person who is being treated, it is necessary that he lie down on his back according to his habit, and spread out all the cord that has been softened over the natural cord; and when he tightens two lips together at the location of the hernia.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord with three or four and a secure stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the stitches; and then treat the other hernias for healing, so that they are healed and the strings fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxxxix.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that in our law castration is prohibited, but for a particular reason it is mentioned in this book; and it is not necessary to remind myself of it unless I mention two things, of which one is that it happens that the doctor who is questioned about that knows the treatment of that person whose castration is needed; and the other way is that we have, because of the animals' juice, had a need for castration of other animals to serve as our brood, just as with pigs and goats and creatures similar to them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways, either by cutting off the testicles or by sectioning through an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the one that is done by cutting off, the way of operation is that they cut the animal in the tail area so that its testicles are softened and reduced and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then return those to your hand within so that they do not come off by touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done through an incision and sectioning, cover that you have the animal and press the cord of its testicles to your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the suspenders, and cut on each side with one section within so that two sections are made.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cut off those pus that you have on each excision.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any of the cord for any reason; but cut the subtle cord above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This way of castration is better because it is done by cutting off; since cutting off prevents the desire of the animal to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that hernia within so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter.lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men happens in two ways: one is that it appears when the space between the testicles narrows, and this is a sign of female nature; because there are two testicles that form an outline of a woman's body because of the presence of female characteristics.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	In certain men, there is a discharge from the penis, which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women there is one kind of hermaphroditism: and this is that the woman's genital opening is like a man's penis with two testicles, but it does not open down; it opens upwards as a man's penis does and has two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: of the two men, and one kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And since you have cut off that flesh within so that it does not retain the smell of that person; and then treat those with the treatment of other hernias.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second kind of hermaphroditism in men, from which there is a discharge from the cord of the testicles, it is not treatment or operation for him.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter.xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On lenting and on prominent flesh due to women's causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A very strong lenting is adjusted to natural causes within so that it does not break out, and in some women it is increased within so that it does not break out at the time of intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then return that excess of lenting with your hand or with oil, and cut on it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not end in incisions, mainly in the hairline, lest it cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that with the treatment of hernias within so that it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	There is hidden flesh that lies in the hideousness of the mother within so that it fills, and a very strong one comes out at the time of birth according to its appearance as if it were cut; therefore, since we have cut lenting, let us treat this with incisions and heal that person.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter.lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of a rash.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alergia is that the woman' s opening not be pierced, or that it be small.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by bad luck which has preceded it, and that person is caused by either adjusted flesh or a subtle cord or string.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is done either in the hairline of the mother, or on the sides of her, or on the upper part of her, or on the lower part of her, and it is forbidden to cut, to engage, or to get married, and a very strong one forbids menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of that person is done by observing the mother's attitude, if the objection seems obvious, certainly; but if it does not seem so, then try to recognize that person with the rope or with the rope-like thread.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the objection is by a subtle cord, and it is between the two lips, then cut that person and destroy it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	It is done by pausing on the two lips, and then pause the rope-like thread on each side in front of them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is on her two legs, with her knees spread out in front of them, and she extends the two lips under force within so that that subtle cord is broken, and the objection appears clear.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then tie a rope and send it to the location, and put that person on it, and hit him with a whip every day until the location is firm.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the cord is thick and stringy, then cut it off with a sharp knife or a piece of wire.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the objection is by flesh, then hang that person from a tree, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	There are medicines for you to stop the flow of blood with a bitter taste, such as acacia, and blood-draining medicine, adjusted to honey of two fingers.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then introduce a wide silver tube so that the hernia does not break out in an unhealed manner.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep him for a few days and administer some of it every day.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then cure him with the other cure of consolidation until he is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the mother's womb of other animals, and then cover it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is for an aching tooth, and the aching tooth in the mother is not done contrary to it with some method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of swelling and of red botulism that happens in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorrhoids are those of the openings of small veins that hurt continuously, and if they are old emorrhoids and have become hard.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the spices of those and the signs of those, and direct there those that I receive cure and those that I do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore say that hemorrhoids and nodules are when in the womb of the mother and do not appear on the surface, then in those there is no cure to be done with some method.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the openings of the mother on which a sensation appears, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And then cover the woman in a loose garment and extend them on a pair of scissors or a sharp blade, and cut those off with rasps.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over them the flux of a certain powder to be cut with rasps, thus: with acacia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then put on weights for an hour, and then remove them in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flux of the pain persists, then make it boil in a solution of sumac and peppercorns and herbs and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of mustard and make paste with honey and vinegar, and apply it to both sides.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the pain has separated, it is good; and if not, then adhere to both with bandages, and cut off the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and dip those into the juice of coriander or the juice of argol or the juice of grapefruit, and apply it to the place; and then cure that place with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But those that are hard to be handled, cover them with water which comes out of it after the second that I said in the handling.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter .lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the piercing of the skull in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Small spices of skull are happening in the mother, thus: with aching and piercing and ulcers and hubble-bubble and pustules and fistulas of hemorrhoids and raggedness and nodules.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these miseries and the spices of those and the signs of those, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I say in this treatise of the cure of skull which is in the mother when it is of those that you have cured, and if you want to know how to make the operation of skull.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of skull in the beginning is acute with percussion and fever and sometimes that hardens on it, and if it feels about it, then do not pierce it, but cure that with water which helps to mature until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider whether you cut the woman on a table that has two tables; and arrange her on her back lower than her belly, and spread her legs, and pause her breasts from her sides, and tie some string around her middle.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the woman should sit on a chair from the right side and administer the instrument with which you will open the opening of the mother, the shape of which will be in those cases that she will make it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, that you keep it from the right side of the woman's womb, and the water of the instrument enters the mother until it reaches the bottom of the womb.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the womb, then consider that you sprinkle dust on the texture of the womb so that it does not allow the entrance of any instrument into the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And consider that you pour the liquid that runs in the instrument above and that the minister has the instrument and mixes the liquid until it reaches the opening of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and is touched with the hand, and is hot and moist, then consider that you dry those off with a sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the cure is evacuated, then consider that you put a sponge submerged in rose oil or green oil in which there is no stiffness; and pause the calce on the section in the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then pause the mother and put clean wool, dipped in water in which are mixed mauve dye.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is customarily cured twice a day with ointment applied to water until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mother and the placenta are washed together, so that they become crystallized with water and honey, and applied to water in which are boiled rags or long hair, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the placenta is within the mother's womb, then consider that you do not cure it with some method, until I have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Of teaching the women how to be clean with this method when they are pregnant according to the following figure:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the woman with child comes to term with signs of it, and that when you see the woman express herself with open legs, and over it is extended by water which comes out of her, and quickly the excitement appears, then know that this birth is a second natural figure, and that the excitement of it is on her head, and the second after it is hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see these signs, then consider that the mother's belly is shaking so that the fetus appears slightly on her head, then put the second one, and it is distinguished from those superfluities with good discrimination.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is the other birth is not natural and not praiseworthy, because when the fetus is lying on its back and the head of it is lying in front of its mother' s head and its feet are stretched out before it, then it is not praiseworthy. It is stretched out the head of it and the mother of it, or to the belly of it, and strongly moved its body over its chest, and resembling the figures of it unpraiseworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the woman be wise and subtle in all these cases, and that she keep herself from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all these figures, and which is the meaning of them in order that it should be understood by water and should be placed on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is lying on its head by natural virtue, and that one is fierce with the woman and difficult to handle, and sometimes its virtue has been weakened, then consider that it should boil, or that women have it in their hair by boiling fenugrec and honey.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then he inserted the probe between his small testicles and cut it short, or sewed it up with a thread, so that no moisture remains in her.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the female abdomen until she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	May she be cured if she is not delivered, then cover her with a cloth of wheat and mustard poultice.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her to be compress and have a cold shower, and for a while the mouth and nose are covered, because the delivery is painful.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two fronts of the baby are already getting cold at the beginning, then you should reduce those with small steps gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	May she obey the instrument, then place her on a table and lift her feet up, and then shake the table onto the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the vibration.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the last part is not turned in and the baby falls out, then cut it off and pull it out with your hands equally, because it is getting cold.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the embryo on her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the baby is on her feet, then you should press those below, and then turn the baby over little by little, and then wrap it up, and then take one of its feet and spread them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	May she be delivered inside the thighs, then you command her to squeeze, and have her exhale with a sigh, because it will be cold if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not delivered in the water that we have described, then you return the baby little by little until you pause her second natural figure, because that will be delivered soon.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden in all water that we have described, then take a compress of aloe and dissolved gum, and hit all of it with a good blow, and then line it with the water of the female's navel, the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make a cut in the water that is moving, so that it reaches the hypogastric muscles.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the openings of her legs are no longer relaxed, then make her sniffing and breathing with mint.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sniffing has lasted for an hour, then place her on a table, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth, and take off her clothes, and press the lower part of her abdomen lightly with compression, because the baby will soon be delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Of the embryo on its own feet and legs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the baby is delivered in this form, then you should make your fingers small step by step; and the woman should be lying on her back, and her feet should be facing down, and her legs should be spread apart, and her hands should be clasped together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on her abdomen little by little, and then pull it out that is left of the feet from the ears, so that it is prepared for the opening of the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the baby is not being pushed out, then take her feet and swing them with a violent movement, and then press on that which is on the hypogastric muscles little by little so that the baby can come out through the openings.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then make your fingers small step by step and wrap up the baby little by little, and command the woman to squeeze herself so that the baby is pushed out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Of the embryo hanging downward from its leg.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	She should be held in your arms, but if you cannot hold her, then raise the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on her back, and shake her with a violent vibration, and then administer the medicines that we have described earlier.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the delivery has occurred, then make her lie on a table and study the reduction of the mother's abdomen, and wrap up the baby according to its second natural figure, and have the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself so that it is pushed out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Of the embryo on its back with its legs spread wide, and the sole of its foot is facing up and the sole of its mother's foot is facing down.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the mother should hold her baby, and then turn it over little by little, and then wrap it up easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is wrapped, and then pause her on the water that we have described of oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to rub herself little by little, and when the water has formed, then make her lie on a table and incline her on the right side, and then command her to compress herself with small steps, and have her exhale with a sigh.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus is prepared on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it is coming out of the mother' side in this way, consider it, and then you should cut the second with your knife inside that it is evacuated from the moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the baby is suspended over the face and the neck of the woman, then you should cut it off, so that it does not hang back and suffer from a delay.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you should make the baby open its mouth little by little before you stop it, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and that one will be delivered soon if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or a multiple birth.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twin eggs are rare, and sometimes three or four, but five is very unusual and uncommon for nature; however, there may be five in a single womb.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And know that they may be multiplied, the second being separated by ciphe, distinguishing those between the ligaments at the navel of each one; and sometimes five are delivered in a single birth, as it is natural for them to come out small. And some are delivered by the mouth, not through the navel as we have described earlier.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if the birth is difficult and they are coming out in a difficult way, then you should take care of them as we have described earlier in the case of abnormal figures.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mother is clever and has the water that makes it easy and gradual, and is slow, and is prepared according to all figures in order to save herself.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recall that it is formed in the mother' body from embryos and it is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some veiled women are formed in the first, second, third, fourth and fifty-first, and six, and seven, and eight times, and each time a woman is born, which causes foetuses to be formed by measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this reminds us that it is in the science of the mother that strength lies for that little-looking water, and then pause at the water as it reminds us.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LVII.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the baby when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus in water that we have described in the division of medicine and it does not come out, then you should use surgery on the mother, considering if she is of sound health and not at fault for the accidents for which she is a loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman should be positioned on her back, with her head tilted upwards and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold the baby's two parts together, so that the child's body does not extend further down during extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with a mixture of water, honey, and fenugreek, as well as sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the woman' hands with those oils and mixtures, and place her hand on her womb, finding the spot where the foetus is located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then find a convenient place: then consider whether the foetus is ready to be delivered; then place the claws on its head, or in its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or let it hang from its beard, or from its breastbone, or at the top of its ribs, or between its ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	In case of delivery in the feet, then lie down on the left side, facing upward.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then let the woman lie on her right side, and place her left hand in a convenient location for support; then insert the claw into one of the locations mentioned previously, until it reaches the cause of the blockage.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and fix another claw in its position, or the third if necessary, so that it is strongly held in place, and not pulled out according to its rectitude alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Then let it be removed completely at once, in order for the relief of its distress to take place immediately if delivery occurs during the extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Then let the extraction take place smoothly; and if any part of it is retained, then anoint the woman with a mixture mentioned previously and insert something to turn it over and free it from the water.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the foetus is partially delivered and stuck, then replace the claws between locations mentioned previously, and deliver the entire foetus.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	In case the woman's back is facing away from the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by tightening the umbilical cord, then wrap a cloth around it; and extract that portion at which the whole is delivered, and mark that or the joint of the spine or the coccyx.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	Then also cover the other side and feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	In case the head of the foetus is large, or if the umbilical cord becomes tight during delivery, or if it is caught on something in the vagina, then insert between the spines of the spine and split the head, extracting the water or dislodging that; or use an instrument named "alundum", the shape of which will correspond to the shapes of the other instruments mentioned previously at the point where this one is placed.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Then it should be delivered by caesarian section if the foetus' head is large by nature: and then mark that with a needle, or pick it up with an alundum; and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is delivered and caught on the breastbone, then split it until the water that is in the feet is emptied.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Then if it is not complicated and does not require delivery during pregnancy or childbirth, you should mark the head as soon as possible according to your skills.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	In case the foetus is present in the womb or in the uterine tubes, then you should pierce that portion where the water that is inside it flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Then if the foetus is located on the woman' side of her body, its attraction to her is light and its direction to her mouth is also light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Then if it is caught on the woman' belly or legs, then extract that with cloth wrapped around your hand; and split the belly and legs until the water that is inside them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Then if the other limbs are still standing and turning the head, then let the mother lie on her back; if her mouth is open, then insert it into her mouth, holding it with one hand, and place a claw in its position with the other; then turn the head over and free it from the mouth.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	Then if the mother' mouth is blocked by a swelling, then do not worry about turning it over; instead, provide an abundant supply of moist substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then administer emollients; and attend to the patient in water that softens and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then if the foetus is located on the woman' side of her body, it should be split; and water should be administered to it while it is still alive.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	Then if water is not possible, let the foetus be extracted in pieces.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then do not leave any cause inside the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Then when you have completed your procedure, administer water to the mother in order to soften the swelling that has occurred during her labor.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	Then if a flow of blood occurs during the delivery, it should be washed with stiff water and the other cure administered.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Then I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another one in her arms is born alive; and that one is a dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time after, swelling occurred in the womb; it swelled up and exploded, then began to emit heat.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	Then he was called to treat him, and he cured him for a long time; and the plague did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I stopped him from using some strong emollients that attract the body, and extracted a bone from it; and after a few days, another bone; and I was amazed when there was not a single bone in her womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cured the plague by extracting those bones; and the present woman was in her usual condition, and after a long time, she gave birth to a small child.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Then I did not believe that it was strange; but in water is science and help for the sick woman to be administered medicines by the hand of God.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The shape of the vertigo that presents the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of strength in which you are enclosed, and at which the two free ends are attached; there are two vertigins on each side of this shape.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this vertigo should be slightly less strict, and it should be made of light or sturdy bois.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Then each kind of wood should have a length of two palms and half; and its width at the bottom should be two palms and a little more, and at the top two palms and a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	Then these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is open to those two prescribed vertigins when you turn them over.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape resembling this one but slightly smaller and lighter.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	The wood used should be like that of ebony or boy's wood according to the appearance of the pliers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May there be two additional aids at the end of them, and the length of those aids is a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to cover them, then turn the woman over on her back with her legs hanging down, so that it is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instruments in such a way that the forken meet according to the quantity you want of the opening of the mouth of the woman before the midwife does it, so that you want it.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the turn that they say the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Shape of the throw that throws the one who is thrown:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Shape of the impact that hits the head hard:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps on the end, several times, and some are forged long with forceps in this form, several times, which has the end cut and is impressed and broken:
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Shape of a little impact:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of an uncut spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of an uncut two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of the forceps with which the head of the thrown one is broken:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a staff with two ends, in which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two long staffs:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are practiced, and when they are more multiplied the species of that one and are prepared by the artisan, how much is easier to their operation and more able men for its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not open these instruments, because the need for them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	The extraction of the second.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained, it is necessary to order the bad woman that she retain her breath, and if it should fall out, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cup and pierce the roof with it and pause in that grass burning the mouth of the woman, with a calm and rough hand and anointing with camel's milk and Arabic myrrh and cassia wood and holy thistle.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and pause that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then return a straw of camomile in the mouth of the woman, and let that run until the vapor comes out into the cavity of the woman.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze with this, and the second one is expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure does not work and is not expelled, then order the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of thyme, and if it should stick again, order her to immerse it in water little by little according to the recipe, so that the woman does not catch fire violently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	In advance, prepare what is needed for the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the quantity of attraction, because she will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the woman is blocked, we have already described the cure with sneezing and with the medicine of the cup with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If none of the above methods works, then you must keep in mind that what is needed is to prevent her from falling into a state of abstraction, but if it should fall out of her mouth, then make sure that she gets better soon; because that will turn it purple and dissolve and expel it.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	If it turns purple, it is bad for the head and the stomach, and if it should be raised by the midwife; then make sure that those substances are administered subcutaneously and conveniently to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already use subcutaneous infusion of nasalt and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of the instrument with which the woman is infused subcutaneously, to prevent retention of menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Is it a vision or an illusion?
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the end that is subtle in the cavity and the wide one on top of the fire, and the infusion should be applied above the flames.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Let that run until that infusion is consumed and repeat: another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The cure for a piercing wound at the bottom of the child not pierced.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Mouths of children not pierced, and the bottoms are pierced in such a way that they are subtle and hidden.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then order the midwife to pierce her tongue in such a way that it is subtle; and if not, pierce that with a staff close up, and make sure it does not touch the larynx.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then pause over that clouded vision with smoke and oil; and then treat that with vinegar until it is better.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it will be pierced, then pause in the roof with a straw for days, and if the child wants to bite it again, take care.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And the piercing of the bottom is due to consolidation of plague or abscess; then when that consolidation is cut, and it is cured with water that we have described in the cure and in the ash.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The cure for the fistulas that they have left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that remain in the part of the child, put a paste of the following ingredients, and if it remains at the bottom further or in the space between one part:
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or motus.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And with that paste of the following ingredients is dried up and cured from the subtle moisture of white pus or subtle pus, and some of those fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are treated with water that is expelled from them by exit and ventilation; and some of those times use the exit strategy, and strong ones are expelled from them by wind.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas that remain in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the hip; and some of those that penetrate into the junction of the crotch and into the neck of the pelvis.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in water that is conoguded in the fistula penetrating into the bottom and not penetrating, it is because you put the child's tongue in the butt, and make a subtle attempt to clean or iron out the fistula when it is not turtuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that there is turtuosity, then make an attempt with iron or hair of the horse within that you feel the attempt or the hair on the child's tongue.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that or the hair on the child' s tongue, then know that it does not penetrate, and then make a cure with it.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the hip, then know that it is absolutely urine from her and prohibition to do at another time than the location with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the junction of the crotch or into the bone and causes pain in the circle of the hip, then know that the attempt is piercing here if not turtuosity within the bone, and pain in the circle of the bottom; and that from her is always a sign of piercing, and if it does not pierce, then it is always a sign of piercing. And if it is always a sign of piercing, then know that it is always a sign of piercing.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas penetrating there is no cure of everything, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the physicians on which they are sealed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which does not penetrate and is not old, the cure of metal is awaited according to what you have recommended, and that which I have already tried and premeditated.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient squats between your two hands and raises his legs inside them, the cushions are inclined towards his belly, and approach a metal to pierce or burn if it is in the tortuosity of a fistula, so that you know the place where the piercing occurs.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that hurts the patient's crotch, then cover that you introduce the finger into the crotch.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel that the piercing has already entered the patient' finger and the tentacle or flesh, then certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that one, for I have said so.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however they say that some curas are made in certain men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the cure with which he hopes to heal him thoroughly is that you ignite the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited thing into the fistula until it enters through the crotch; and repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated parts that resemble a feather of an owl are firmly closed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And cure that one with warm water enveloped in a sack until all those parts that are adjusted and tightened are fully healed; and if it is cured, it is well; and if not, then it will not be cured by any other medicine.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the piercing enters and does not enter into the finger that is in the crotch, and between that one and the tentacle that is slightly flesh or meat, and sometimes the fistula opens where the surface of the codena (a small bag) is broken; then dry the codena from the beginning of the opening of the fistula, and you see if it dries out completely; and if the piercing is completely cut off at the place where the tip of the tentacle enters, and by that one is released and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then unbundle those fistulated parts that are assembled like a tube of an owl's feather, and they do not break due to any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flux of blood comes between you and your work when you are cutting those parts, then the instrument that is used to cut it off with ease is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts well: so it is tightened on those adjusted parts, and the excess of that blood is removed from the dry part.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And cure that one with warm water enveloped in a sack or a twisted rope until the place where it breaks is firm, and then cure plague with bitter medicine, which generates and hardens meat.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines are used to tighten and cut off; when they are restored, it is already cured, and you do not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already entered into the crotch and is elongated from its surface, then introduce the finger into the crotch and feel it out.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel the tentacle and it is slightly meat or flesh between you and it, and it is similar to the piercing; then there is no operation in that one according to trusted and hopeful ways.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in the following three ways: either to cauterize that one as we have said; or to dry that one inside which you can achieve the cavity of it so that you can possibly introduce your finger and cure that one accordingly; or do not cut off that one with a sharp thing, so that it does not hurt the patient' crotch, but let it arrive at the will of the patient, and cure that one with water that we have said because it heals strongly; or to elongated that one slightly and make the pus come out from that one which you dry inside according to what we have said about the anus, or with the tentacle or another instrument with a sharp tip, and then unbundle those fistulated parts inside which you can achieve the cavity so that you can easily introduce your finger, and cure that one accordingly; or try to make the restoration of all the plague by cutting off, and if the pus opening does not solidify, and the fistula opens at the crotch's junction, then let the pus come out from the patient' anus.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases the fistula is finished according to this way: you introduce the tentacle into the fistula, and it is at the crotch' junction facing the skin surface with the codena, and on the edge of the crotch; then take a sharp instrument's tip, which is like preparing threads according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and introduce that one into the codena wrapped in six threads or around it; and then introduce the tentacle into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates in the margin of the crotch towards inside, then you take out the codena from that one as it is introduced into the crotch; then you remove the tip of the codena and adjust both ends with a sharp thing, and let it rest there for a day or two, and when you cut the codena into meat, those parts are inserted where those two ends fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, then make that one pierce in some way that is convenient for you, but not inside it, because it is not convenient to you that you should make it cut off so that you do not hurt the patient' crotch; and then make that one be cured.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the knife that is used to cut off the fistula: its curve is sharp and the other end is not, so that you do not hurt him where it is not necessary, as in some cases.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the sutures of hemorrhoids that bleed in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are like two things: either they are between the buttocks resembling wood, or those are with grass-like roots.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large ones; and that the blood from those is like drops, and it is one thing; and that those do not come out of their own accord, but only come out when pushed by a sharp thing, and that those come out of the crotch' sides.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that come out from the crotch are according to the amount of water: that which comes out is yellow or a little blood; and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that one which is inside the crotch is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze the crotch until the hemorrhoids appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut yourself with a sharp object or with your nails, and then cut off those veiny roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if those nails are not held in them because of their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a woolen blanket, and remove those with your fingernails, and cut off those roots; and then feel them out, and sprinkle some dried herbs on them according to the incision, so that they are there for cauterization; or cauterize those as it is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure according to which they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey the exit, then cut the patient' hair with a sharp thing that causes a little pain; and wash those with water from the crotch, which obeys the exit slightly when the patient is washed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If hemorrhoids emerge from the anus, the cause is likely to be mild; it is because you are holding those with your thumb or with a finger and scratching them and then applying medicine to that which has been said to have been healed within.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever is doing the incision should follow this manner: take a tightly wrapped thread and insert it into a needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their ends; and wrap the two ends of the thread around the needle's point from the opposite side, and then remove the needle. Then tighten the knot firmly, and then untie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them; and leave one un-scratched, so that the excess blood from the heart may run out from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over it; and place that on the patient's buttocks and order the servant to rest on top of it.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then let it fall into a box; and when it is falling, heal those with oil or with another medicine within that is healing.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treatment of fissures.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	The following are seen due to the drying out of a fissure or due to the tightening up by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since those ancient remedies are no good in that medicine, when you scratch them with a spatum or with your thumb within so that they are moist and bathed by that water which is above them, which prevents them from drying out; and then heal those that have already dried up.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should cut them with a sharp instrument more forcefully than the first time that it was scratched, and when they have been scraped, heal those that have already been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of treatment of gangrene, so to speak.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You should know that gangrene is final; and it is not unless you notice the color of the body resembling a clove's head, and it is present throughout the whole body, more so in the thighs and feet, and especially in the joints, and from these pain comes from within.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then if it is incised where it is in the circle of gangrene, and it has been caught with scissors or a finger, and then eradicated from its root; and then heal that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that was preceding in the same chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A warts is a small, round, sharp, raised area on the surface of the body, and it is seen in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for this is to stretch and then scrape it, or to open it up with a thread from within that box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as has been said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated face-to-face and reverse-face with the instrument that I have directed you to use.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A bee sting is a small, raised area on the skin that looks like a mosquito bite, and when it touches something sharp, it breaks open inside the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for this is to use a pen of an owl or a vulture's pen, and make it firm; then place that over the area of the sting that contains the circle of the pen's tail; and then turn your hand around so that the stinger touches the skin. Then heal those that have been stung by fire, and if you wish, cauterize them with fire or with acute medicine.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this using the pen of iron or steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Make the tip of the pen slightly rounded, silent (so it does not pierce), wrapped in a way that keeps it from breaking and turning inside out.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the sting according to what has been said in the cauterization of athyle in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the forms of instruments that are used to administer surgery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some stings are treated with silver or melted brass or iron; and some of these instruments are small and others large, depending on the instrument used in treating small children, for those that are painful or painful are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The great and rare form of surgery:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the pen' s lid is made wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished from that point where the bag is attached in such a way.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The tip of the pen' s lever is inserted into the buttocks, silent  (if it does not pierce), turning towards a subtlety; and on one side of the handle there are two grooves, and on the other side, one groove, and that the thickness of the groove is according to the thickness of the rays and smaller or larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And may the bag that holds the medicine be made from the bladder of an animal or from sheep's wool, and its handle is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it is pierced by sharp grooves in such a way that the pen turns; and if the space between the grooves is large, so is the length of the pen' s lever.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert it into those sharp grooves with a strong, pointed thing that is made from the bladder of an animal or from wool, and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed on top of the pen' s lever, make it straight in the center of the instrument using two sharp things, and then heal each groove: If the quality of healing with this is that you fill the bag with medicine, boil it according to the quantity of tolerance for the patient; and be careful that it is not too short or too long.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then place the patient on their back, raising their legs up, and placing a blanket over them, or a mattress; and then apply the tip of cauterization to oil or white honey or to an ointment of fenugrec or similar; and then insert it into the buttocks with ease, and the servant holds the bag and squeezes it with two hands and forces it out into the air within the surgery; and then remove the cauterization and the patient' s legs from the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that person to vomit, hold back as much as possible; and if they sleep for a whole night, it is better to leave them alone.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you heal that in the surgery of abdominal pain and vomiting, then you should repeat the cauterization within so that it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhoids or painful boils, then may the surgery be rare and sharp, of the instruments that are used to treat small children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have said and done in the division of surgery of wounds that suits the patient, and I order you to perform those with medicine according to the prescription.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	And therefore say that wounds are different depending on where they are made and depending on the place where they are laid.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which stings are made include a cut from a sharp object, an incision with a blade, a stabbing with a lance, a cut with an ax, or an arrow, or similar to those of the causes of stings.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the wounds that are in the body' s places include a wound on the head, the neck, the feet, the abdomen, and the chest, or similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure of some plagues so that this reasoning and order is applied to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues, because the recollection of the composed will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And I say that when it happens in the head simple plague and is not fracture, then consider: if it is by consumption of fluid or appearance, and has already trinquada the neck so only and is great plague and you fear over this patient having an apostema cauterization, then you coyta and fleubotomize the head at once, and do not delay it; and extracts according to the quantity of the virtue of him if there is no more cause to fleubotomia, more so if the disease that is caused by the plague is few.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be the cauterization of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient away from replies and coarse foods and drinks.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if by moderation prohibit any cause, then it is decreased from the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the plague, if to him happens an apostema cauterization, then put a fus in olive oil only or in wine in which is sterilized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of an apostema cauterization, then pause on the plague, if it is recent let him rest and do not change that powder that I recommend to apply.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause on alscus wetting within so that it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is great or it is by incision of hair and appearance, and their lips are not closed by puvis, then adjust those according to what I recommend from the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and it is not retenir by him but a small suspension, then cut off that and cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of the neck, and order the patient that he is eaten foods in which there is cruelty: heads and formen coyts and appearances before it is cured.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is an odor of decay in the neck and it does not adhere to the bone, then you cut off all that and throw it away and cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which the flow of blood may come out and it is not absorbed by medicines, then you inquire about that artery, and if there is an odor of non-incision, then cut off that with a knife, or tie it; and if necessity forces you that what I have said does not conform to you, then cauterize it within so that the disease is removed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; and I put on those this powder, for consolidated that before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way of this powder is this: take an olive of part-scented plants, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of non-extinct ingredients; make all well mixed and crushed, and if the plague is filled with it, and is constrained by a good constriction so that it adheres to it, and it coagulates itself.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then you apply this powder to it and let it rest, and do not move it while it is so that it is not an apostema, for it is not absorbed by him the medicine within that it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And any other time make only water, when it is not to you in present olive and dragon' blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is suitable for the great plagues when it is convenient that they be applied to those and be well-mixed, and only the recent plagues are affected by their disease, and whose air has not changed them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then I do not recommend the use of this powder, but rather cure those with water that we have said, or if you apply a hot compress on the affected parts, or apply cold water to them; and then cure those with another method within so that they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens in the fracture of the plague on the bone and it is small, then you extract water with a vessel.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I recommend the cure of head fractures in venenous water.
De las plaguas del col.	of the throat plagues:
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if it happens in the throat plague, then it is not distinguished from the head plague in medication, and between the head plague when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the throat are incised or arterial, then if it is a nerve, do not apply to him the medicine that causes a violent stinging, and also cut off those that are similar to them for the sake of the nerves and counteraction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause on the plague for any reason of all froth, for the substance of the nerves is frothy and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the pus from all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if water with drugs is washed away, then wash it with hot water, and make it a small fire in olive oil, and let it rest, and apply a strong compress on the affected parts; and give them wine mixed with water to drink.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then administer a suture or constrict the lips of him, and cure that with powder within that it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague has depth or happens in the pus that is lower part broken down, then pierce that in the place most affected.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the plague has already been incised an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize that if necessity forces you to water.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spine of the neck has already been incised, and all veins have been saved from the throat, then you adjust the lips of the neck with a suture over the cana of the neck and do not touch that; in advance you straighten it over its natural figure, and apply to it with a strong compress for the sake of tightening it and let it rest over those days; and cure that with hot water to make it stiffer and excited within so that it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the plague has already occurred in the bone and it is out of shape, then strike that, and if there are any fragments of bones, extract all that you can; and if the skin does not cover him, let it rest so that the plague is cured, and separate and relieve it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent then apply this powder to it, which I recommend to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the plague has occurred through a fistula, then cure that with water of which the recollection will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	of the throat or when it happens in between the shoulders and it is caused by cold or appearance.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	And if it is a piercing of a lance or a knife, and deep in the throat, then consider more if the patient has windiness from this plague; then know that the plague is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the plague is recent from the first hour, then you apply this powder to him, and do not constrict that so that it is not the disease retained in the depth of him and it returns to the patient's heart; and then pause on him with a strong compress, and let go those two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not on hand, place an open vessel over the area to let it drain and dry out; and make sure the patient sleeps on the bed so that blood can run from the injury.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	And if it has been more than three days since the poultice was applied and no spasms or tremors occur in the patient or constriction of breath, and other signs are good, then you will know that the poultice is effective; and then treat them with caliches and the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	And if the patient's recovery is delayed and it has been a long time since the injury occurred, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat them with surgery accordingly.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a sharp object or knife and is shallow on the foot or leg, then treat it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if it has already come loose from the bone and only a few pieces remain embedded, then you should twist the poultice to remove them, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they are not separated, then you should leave them in place and let the poultice remove them, which is more convenient.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds that occur on different parts of the body, the treatment is the same as that which we have described.
De las plaguas del ventre.	For abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be severe, slight, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	With large hernias, the intestine or nerve protrudes and needs to be surgically sutured with precise and delicate movements.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is difficult to repair in any other way; if you do not prevent the protrusion of their content into its place soon enough, it will become thicker and more difficult to deal with, as it becomes blocked by internal organs.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	The best course of action is to take the middle road; because it is not difficult to reduce the intestine in this case, nor is it difficult in the two categories mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that abdominal surgery involves two main methods and additional techniques; common surgery can be performed in several ways, but the basic principles apply to all types of wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	There are two other types of surgery that are specific to abdominal wounds, but they can be applied to other wounds as well; however, they are primarily used for abdominal injuries.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I remind you to expose and declare each wound.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So then I say that when the wound is small and there is no obstruction from the intestine in that area, and it is difficult to reduce it, this can happen in two ways: either due to the size of the disruption as mentioned above, or when the intestine is swollen due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so, when this is the case, you should pierce it with a sharp object as if you were to dip a sponge or cloth into running water alone, or if you were to scoop up water from a stream, lake, or river, and pour it over the abdomen until the swelling goes down.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some hernias have a natural tendency to shrink on their own without any intervention; in this case, it is better to use water from a spring or well for relief rather than running water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And if you notice that the swelling has gone down, then you should rinse the intestine with water that is already warm and slightly salty; this will help to soothe the affected area due to its cooling effect and the mild salt content.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if this treatment is not sufficient for the injury, then you should cut the wound with a small instrument; this will help to remove any internal hemorrhoids that may be causing discomfort.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is best when it is not necessary to cut and remove excess tissue; you should also avoid unnecessary surgery and starvation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, there are several forms it can take:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one is an acute, sharp edge; the other is blunt and slightly rounded, lacking the acute quality of a knife's edge.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And if the wound is large and the intestine protrudes, then you should reduce it according to its natural shape, in its own place, if possible above water; this is better than reducing it elsewhere.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And if the wound is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should place the patient on their back, pausing their legs out beyond their shoulders; and if it is located in the upper portion, then turn the patient over so that the head is facing upward, and their feet are extended.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the wound is located in either of the two central areas of the abdomen, you should pause your attention and consideration momentarily to ensure that the wound is positioned higher than its opposite; this will help prevent any complications.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must prepare water for the large wounds and also for the smaller ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	For small wounds, prepare the water and then place it between your patient's three or four most prominent parts; the wound should be entirely enclosed within these parts, with the suture being the last to be completed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common way to sew: one that holds the needle, depending on the size of the wound; and then leave the end of the thread at the opposite end of the knot, or two ends of the thread, hanging, keeping them out of reach from within the two openings created by cutting the knot in half, ensuring it does not get tangled; and there are four orders: first, secure one end of the thread to the needle; second, cut the thread at the desired length; third, tie a simple knot; fourth, leave the other end loose.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then secure the thread in double knots around the needle's circuit, and sometimes combine two openings from each side, and then add two layers of skin to the wound by means of a cut; and then leave a loop of thread at the end of the needle, tying it to the first knot, ensuring that it does not become tangled; and if you need more thread, continue filling the loop until the entire construction is complete.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the smaller needles should be delicate and subtle, as they cut through flesh easily; and the thicker ones are difficult to handle in a knot, so they must also be combined with subtlety and delicacy.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle should be fixed to one end of the knot, but rather, that the thread does not easily slip through the skin and that the wound remains intact while it heals.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the suture too far so that the wound is not prevented from healing properly.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And you should cut the ends of the needles so that they do not get stuck in the patient' bed; and then place them on top of the expanded sutures, ensuring that the needle' ends are secure; and leave it like that until you are sure that the wound has healed properly.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles are most suitable for small wounds, as they reduce the risk of damage to the surrounding tissue; this is because either a single needle or two separate ones can be used to secure the suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second type of suture is similar: and then you prepare the four ends of the thread using one needle or two; each end is tied to the corresponding end of the two openings created by cutting the knot in half, keeping it secure within the needle' handle; this is done with care and subtlety.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when I hold the needle against these four extremities, reduce the needle from that half-part where it begins, so that the thread retracts from the pus rising from the wound, so that the suture is a second suture of cloth held by which the cloths are strong.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each stitch the quantity of thread of this smaller one.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch is for a man who was struck in the belly by a knife, and it was the beginning of a wound that measured two palms across from one side to another, and it was a rupture on half the body; then I reduced that part that the intestine had broken out by the space of twenty-two hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And that wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I healed it, then applied honey to its surface, and turned it over; and there were no more complaints.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other wounds had not healed; and, by a miracle, for I did not heal that one with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment is not applied or any medicine used, but I placed a piece of cloth on the wound twice each day and washed it thoroughly with water containing honey until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Then I said two kinds of stitches, according to the narrative of the Bible.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with a stitch of twine, and insert the needle from outside into inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle penetrates in the twine and in that half-part according to direction and length of all the thing, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other half-part from outside into inside in the other end of the thing.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so, when you have made that penetration, then you make that same penetration another time in that end of the thread where the needle has gone from outside into inside; and leave the end of the thread that is on that side, and make the needle penetrate in the other half-part, from outside into inside, in the other end of the thread.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration with your own hand, in which you have made the same penetration in the thread, into the thread at the end where the needle has gone from outside into inside; and make that end of the thread come out, so that it comes out through the part where the needle has penetrated.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin to sew from that side, and cut the thread at the end where you have made the needle enter; and return that same thread to that end where it has come out of the thread, and bring it around to that other end where it is on the other side; and cut that thread.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And then you make one more cut, and another, until you have made all the cuts that are necessary according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this method of sewing is that you sew with a stitch that includes the skin, so that you sew the twine once from one side of the cut to the other; and that you do not leave any part of the cut uncovered by the twine.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second kind of stitch is called 'Golia', and it is made according to his speech that it is made with medicine that sews those cuts together, so that it adds half of a cut to the other half by nature; and apply the end of one to the end of the other, and it is done according to what I have told you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you hold the needle at the end of the thread that is on your side, and make that penetration from inside into the other half; and leave two ends of the twine, and return the needle to that end where it has gone from outside into inside, in two extremities of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then you return those ends, and make that penetration from inside into the other half in two extremities of the thread; and it is done according to what I have told you.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than the common way of sewing that has been told before, and it is a stitch on which I have reminded you.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Golia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they said to him, "This is a stitch of the belly that is done with two needles; so you should insert the needle from here, where it is necessary, and make that penetration inside the other half according to a stitch of those that are made with nails; and make that needle enter there."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the belly, then the stitch of it is more difficult than in the other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the joke about medicine for wounds is different from that of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is that when you achieve a recent wound on the body before it heals itself, and you remove the intestine from within, and sew it so that it does not fall out; then place over it powdered garlic.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over it powdered garlic, and let those that are present there rot, and that the intestines be consolidated twine and flesh; and so heal it in this way as is done for other wounds, unless it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have medicines at hand, then place over it for a while, because it begins to hurt; and change that cloth twice a day, and wash it thoroughly with water containing garlic, in order to heal it; because you will not need other medicine in different situations when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound will spread to other main members, then place over it wool of a lion soaked in oil of anise, or in rosewater; and leave it there in the space between the pains and let them drip.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, since the wound has opened, then apply a black stinging substance on it, and more so if the pus has reached the intestine and caused an opening.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that the one that is of thick intestine is a light healing for the one that is of thin intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is a difficult healing because the intestine that is called 'gegunu' does not receive wound healing in its place of all; and that is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and to its size compared to those, and to its closeness to the nerves of the body.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you remove from the wound is cloth, and you achieve a recent wound, then reduce it according to your instruction on how to reduce intestines in a bundle.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed to that space and it has already become black or white, then you should sew with a twine on the area that is damaged by it, in order for blood to flow from it; because there are veins and arteries in the cloth.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you cut off that other thing, and place two ends of the twine pendent to the left of the wound; so that on your side there is no attraction from it due to the movement of the blood; because that part is the one where the wound has opened.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder about wounds when they happen in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption happens in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored in some people; because I have seen one who was struck by an arrow in his belly with a lance and it was the beginning of a wound on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula; and from it came pus and gas, and there was a putrefaction and a stench.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	So then you continue the treatment of him already, for he is not yet stabilized in his recovery, but I will continue to sublimate that medicine that makes him healthy and solidifies the wound.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And then you put a bandage on him that covers the wound in his belly; and do not let the patient eat or drink anything, nor do any exercise or wash, and stop this treatment for now.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when the hernia is small, you should wrap it up according to this method: and that you take long threads; and then you tighten the two lips of the hernia and put one thread of those between them; so that, when he bites his lips together, the thread will be under them; therefore, when he opens his mouth, the thread will not come out, but it will be cut off.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another bandage next to the first one, and do not stop making bandages as the amount of hernia increases.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then you tie that bandage and cut off the excess; and so, when the hernia is completely healed in its place, do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia be easily removed with a subtle knife made of animal bone, for it is sharp; and you take the end of such hernia-strings, and if they are thin, cut off the excess; and then tie the end of these strings to another string, wrapped, and then insert this string into needles and tie them together, and reduce them in this way.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of suturing with strings is only another way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the hernia is large and wide, certainly, because it only involves sub-cutting, and not healing him completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment of swollen joints and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any abscess and suppurative inflammation, when wrapped up and aged, become an ulcer; and does not consolidate and get hard all the time, and is not cut off, but rather forms a fistula, which we generally call swollen joint, and to which we apply this treatment.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to its nature, is a deep, hard, white tunnel, and does not hurt, and which is concave on the outside as it is concave from pain; therefore, it is called "pain" in this case.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in men of the moist type, which gets hot; and the moisture is cut off in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture becomes thick, and it is small, and it is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said above that any ulcer that is not healed or in the dry skin is caused by one of these nine things: because there is a lack of blood circulation in it; or because of a poison; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents the development of new flesh; or because it is thick; or because that ulcer makes pus and the material that comes out is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its treatment; or because corruption spreads in the area, causing epidemics; or because, in the region where it is located, digestion is difficult and the poison is not eliminated, which prevents the healing of the abscess by nature; or because there is an underlying bone, or several bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already explained all these causes, and they are the same as those that were mentioned in the division of treatments.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so I will tell you how to treat the fistula, which is done by surgery with a knife.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the cypher, or the bowel, or any of the cavities, or any of the joints composed by two bones together, and so on, from one part of the body to another. And these fistulas are of different types: they either emerge from a main member and similar members; or, from the skin in different parts of the body.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, of all these fistulas, this type is the most difficult to heal and treat, and it is difficult to cure, and work and ignorance are responsible for this.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If one of those fistulas has not penetrated deeply into these locations that I have mentioned, and you wait and trust in the treatment of it, but also want to gain knowledge about it; then take a sample of it and analyze it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle magnet, because lead, due to its lightness, can be easily bent and shaped according to the twists of the fistula.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is not too horrible, it is not possible for you to distinguish its nature by smell alone.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then freeze the opening with ice, because the moisture that you use to freeze it will flow through all other openings and run off.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then ask carefully, according to which method you can understand if there are bones or nerves here; and it is the concave shape of the fistula that is far away or close by, or a fistula with only openings and no bone underneath; and this opening is entirely under your control, and with your own hands you can feel it; and understand its nature and causes through symptoms and accidents of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And then, when you have considered all these causes carefully, proceed to the treatment according to confidence: and I tell you now if it is a fistula that appears near by, or in a place full of pus, far from a joint, or nerves, or an artery, or a vein, or one of those places that I have mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry up that fistula according to what has been said above in the description of it; and keep the opening closed with a plug, and wash your hands often, for it is from the dirtiness of the fistula and the rotting meat that it comes out; and wash it out with water, and do not let any medicine touch it, or wash it off; and if it comes out through the skin, do not put anything on it.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is very deep, and it is still open, then fill it up completely with medicines, and wrap them tightly in bandages; and insert them into the opening of the fistula, which you have already examined for bones.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And let that medicine sit there in the cavity of the fistula, because the sharp medicine will corrode everything that is rotten in it.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore that with bandages that will warm up the flesh that is being healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by water alone, then you should cauterize it according to what we have said above.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you must be careful not to harm any veins, nerves, or main member; then dry it up according to what we have said above in the description of it; and do not put anything on it until you are certain that it will heal.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is yours and it is in any corruption or darkness, then fill that cavity with water completely so that the corruption may be all washed away; and then treat it with water, which will heal it.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and gets hot; know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you discover, with great effort and care, the reason for it and clean it thoroughly; and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is well, it is good; and if not, then know that corruption is in the depths of the body, which cannot be reached, and so you do not have to worry about it but only heal it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted, then it is small, or if it is possible to reach it with your fingers, then you should use sharp tweezers to remove it.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and because they do not cause any trouble with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if for some reason there is moisture, and in its place there is no fear or mistake, then cut off those ligaments or muscles if they are there, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to put the bones back in place immediately, then pause on the edge of the wound that you have made, and let go that part so that it does not get stuck between those bones of meat and ligaments, and keep the wound open so that it is not consolidated, and the cut that you have made in your operation does not close.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	While waiting, if you are afraid, pause on the edge of the wound immersed in a strong oil, or an Egyptian ointment, or one of the green oils, for when those ligaments are cut, and the bones are separated from each other, then the application of that ointment will be helpful.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone, then cut it with a saw or some other instrument similar to those, and if that bone which is corrupted is on the surface of the foot so much only, then carefully remove that blackness and corruption completely, and restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that bone which is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound completely at the place where the corruption has entered, and then heal it completely so that it does not get worse.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you send someone to a doctor for him to pause there, so that he can help and guide your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Find a young man of about thirty years old, who has pain in his testicles, and the pain comes from within the body, going deep into the flesh, until it reaches the testicles, and it is caused by a large swelling, and not by an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then wait for the time to pass with that medicine given by doctors until the swelling becomes large, and hurry up with that medicine, and it will help to stop the pain and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then after two years, many doctors were consulted, but they did not know what to do, because I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the leg of that man and the fluids running out from those orifices for a long time, and his whole body was very pale, and the color of it was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I intervened with one of those orifices and pushed that fluid into the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I carefully examined all the orifices, and I found where those fluids came from all over the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I hid myself and cut carefully on one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone that was rotten, and I removed it completely, and it was very dry and corrupted, and another part of the femur had already been penetrated into the pelvis.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I carefully closed that wound on me, which had been discovered and prepared for that bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not a bone but that corruption which I had removed and sealed up, and I had already broken off a piece of it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I waited for the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I went again and discovered the second bone from the first discovery, and I continued to remove that corruption completely with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then I closed that wound on me as if there had been corruption, and then I performed the cure and restoration of that leg, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another bone on the other side and did not cut it completely, but I carefully cut a small piece of it at a time to perform the restoration of that leg, and it was not restored until I cut into it around a palm of it, and I extracted the marrow, and then I healed it with medicine, and it consolidated slightly and was cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for repetition in that surgery or section of the leg except by the disposition of the person's age and his poor tolerance and fear of death, because he dies at any time due to excessive vomiting and fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And then it is cured completely, and there is nothing wrong with the bone's texture; the virtue of that person returns to their body; they become accustomed to their conditions, and they do not cause any discomfort in walking or in any other way for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in your body already broken, then you should do this according to this order: first, take a piece of strong thread and tie it tightly at the end of that bone; then command someone to stretch that bone, and let him extend that bone as much as possible, so that when you cut the thread, it does not reach the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then wait a little or put it on a table in a comfortable position, because when you cut the bone, you do not have to cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And you should cut the bone little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then force it with another piece of thread.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and prominent, then you should discover all its parts completely; then wait a little and stretch it, and then cut that bone at the place where corruption begins, so that it does not spread to the other bone.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the cutting be done according to the location of corruption a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	But if the corruption is at the joint, then cut that joint completely rotten, and force the bone to join with another bone.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not a reason for anything else.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or neck, it is difficult; however, if you ask about the location of that corruption and cut it, then do so according to each person's ability, and at any time, correct your course if it goes against any blood vessels or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what instruments are suitable for such operations, and how to prepare them, and their size, shape, and material; because all of these things are important for performing a successful operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation requires a specific instrument; because you are experienced and knowledgeable in the methods of this art, and you have witnessed many cases of success and failure, because you have already performed similar operations on yourself.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will teach you the number of instruments that you should use simply in case you need to perform an operation on yourself.
Forma de serra:	Shape of a saw
Forma de autra serra:	Another shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	A different shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	A different big shaped saw:
Forma de ray:	A shape of a ream:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this saw should be shaped like the star's claw, and the points of it should be shaped like the points of an astragale.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And unless you find that the heads of the joints are corroded, or the large mouth is wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	A shape of a big razor among others:
Forma de razori menor:	A shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	A shape of a lateral razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	A different nicely made saw: let be done a curved shape of it and the keenness of it of iron, and the member of it of a dagger nicely made.
Forma de lu:	A shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	A shape of a razor having a concave:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	A shape of a subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	A shape of another curved razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	A shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	A shape of teeth having the bones engraved:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	A shape of a smaller engraving tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	A shape of another engraving tool resembling a saw, and its end is curved, and it is shown in multiple locations in the sculpture of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a saw which matches the cutout shape of those bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular with an acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and its appearance is a covering that all the causes we have said of razors, engraving tools, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of engraving ends and the locking of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can be cut off due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not confer with you, or sometimes the corruption occurs away from that member which does not affect any cause, then cover that member within this water in order that it causes the patient's death or a malice which is better removed from that member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that member on which it occurs is that it becomes black within so that it burns the flesh and is burned away, or because it has been cut off close to that part which becomes black within so that the poyredura (corrosion) of that part comes within that member that affects all the body; and therefore you should cut off that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And resembling if it is a cause of corruption due to some poisonous causes then also with scorpion, or a snake, or an adder, and in similar way.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or injury is at the end of it, then you cut off that end and do not give space for the corruption to enter the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And resembling if it affects the whole body, then you cut off that part from which the corruption arises or has spread to the entire arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if not, then cut off that arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if it is a different corruption and it surrounds the joint, then that member will die; and the amount of virtue in order to cure this different cause is quantity.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And resembling when corruption arises in one part of the foot, then you cut off that part within one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes place at the heel of the foot, then you cut off all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Maybe if it is in between the legs, then you cut off the crotch at the joint of the legs.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the heel, then there is only one option, which is to put the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The way of cutting off the member or sawing it is that you strengthen the joint at the end where you want to cut, and make another joint on the spot, and extend the ministering joint on the spots, and extend the other joint on them; and you separate the flesh that is between two joints, and cut all of it; and that be cut or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if it is stopped by a strip of linen from all the spots so that it does not touch the spot, and brings the patient' injury into order and the poultice cold; and
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Maybe if it occurs during work, then you cauterize the spot with care or pour some dust onto it and tighten it up; and then return to your medication as soon as possible.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cut off the infected member with a convenient joint, and cure that within so that it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I tell you that in an old man's foot, this mistake that I and you had forgotten, which is that he has come to him black by the heat of fire;
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in his toe within so that it tends all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for this second time more than the first cause causes him to go to that member with the speed of fire that burns him with pain and the burning up of his own flesh, and he cuts off that foot at the joint, and it is healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time it happened to him that member of the body that causes corruption in the toe of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I ran to him, and so I pierced the excess fluid from his body with care that I had placed on his body for his cure, by the improvement of his body; and the excess fluid did not cause any reaction, and it began to go into another part within the body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he called me to cut off his body, and I did not want to make any hope that the excess fluid would cause a reaction, but I preferred to cut off his body, for the virtue of the patient' death was over sacrifice.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he departed from me, and he returned to his own country, and I made him prepare himself and cut off all of his body, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added to this narrative but that it may be an assistant over him who is affected by this malady, and that it may serve as an example for others in order that they should know how to treat this malady.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of medicine with its quality and the application of poultices.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When it occurs in the middle of large bones and the space of the abscess is prolonged within so that it forms a collection of pus, then cut it open and perforate it, and drain it out with care; and when it comes out, bind it up tightly as if it were a bandage, and do not let it spread to the bone or to the nerves or joints, it is called a sinus, and is not named as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Maybe if the space is prolonged within so that it leads to corruption in some member, then it is called a fistula and not called zookem.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut off all of that abscess as if it were rolled up, and especially when it is softened and done with care so that it does not stick to the spot because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Maybe if you hope that the abscess will adhere and that that corruption has not occurred through successive cause, then in that abscess has opened up a hole from the front, then treat that with poultices.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And that is what you consider to be a sinus, and if it is large, and the odor of it is unpleasant, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil and vinegar and honey receving parts in equal amounts, and let them be applied to a bandage, and bound to the fire so that the medicine boils and penetrates to the inside.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And now you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; and you cloister him at noon, and strengthen his orifices, and leave the medicine with him for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And now remove that with waste; and make water for so many days within that it purifies the sinus and restores the discharge.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some times the cloister is made with ash water, when you do not have this remedy at hand; and it is because you take the ashes of wine, and place them on the water; and now add that to it and cloister him within so that you swear that the sinus will be healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then he is cloistered with water and honey and it is mixed with three parts of licorice, and he is cloistered with wine and honey mixed, for by the property of honey that it purifies and washes, and the wine binds to the sinus, and most when there is an excess of dryness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made water a few times and are satisfied that the sinus is healed, then he is cloistered with water that makes the flesh come out on it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is because you take of the ointment of daphnicum and dissolve that with rosin oil and wine; or that you cloister him with some medicines and ointments that have the properties that I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinus are tight in which the tube of the cloister does not enter, then you widen it little by little, and put a few wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basil ointment within so that it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And apparently if the orifices are large, then you add sutures to the lips and leave the quantity in which the cloister is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the vein flows is raised at the top of its leg, then dry that place with a poultice in it so that the vein runs inside, for when the vein is constricted in the sinus, the flesh becomes engorged in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within according to the shape of the leg as you wish, then you perforate it that you prepare the member for which the vein runs smoothly according to what you wear and not being held back by any cause of the vein.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed on the sinus conveniently with water that you want to extend those over a napkin.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the napkin is of such a great quantity as to make communication of all the sinus; and you close with scissors on the right side of the orifice of the sinus a small punch wide enough, and you extend over another napkin with Egyptian ointment according to the quantity of the punch, and place it by position far away from the orifice of the sinus so that the smell of the leg does not come out through it and remains covered for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which you restore every hour so that it comes out water that is adjusted in it from the leg.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if the water that runs from the leg is much or little, or is it digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And you consider the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in apoplexia.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that is adhering to the orifice of the sinus has already become attached, or takes possession of it, then every three days, and when you move the napkin, change the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May you not despair of the adhesion to it, for the cure takes possession, because such men are there who in generations of flesh have had this in their lungs, and such men are they who do not possess it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus has had many days of indigestion of the leg, then you know that the sinus is not attached; and if the adhesion of the sinus is prolonged, then adjust the medicines in a state of drying out of the medicines, and if they are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried up with ointment of daphnicum when there is an excess of addiction of tar.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last of these remedies is that you take of ointment of daphnicum and dissolve it in rosin oil, and be about him with wine of antispasmodic in its substance, and use that, and employ it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And this already seems in that action when there is no leg, ointment of daphnicum, honey when it is hot within so that it thickens, and use that; or you take mirra and allantoin and mix them, and cut the whole down and powder over a napkin and tighten it on the sinus; and line the honey which has been heated inside so that it thickens, and powder over a napkin and tighten.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times you administer to him the long herb of the sky and cut it from the celestial lily and flour of erbs and centaurea, and use those simple or adjust them, and mix those and pass them through a sieve and powder over the honey which I have repeated; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in its head, and has already been investigated in the bones or in the other hard members or at the joints; then you treat it with a fistular cure, thus: when above is dit.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of Cure of paretic and fingernail rubbed and cut and incising the finger added to and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paretic is an apoplexia that leaves the nail of the toe of the hand or foot, and greatly weakens the others, and when it is prolonged and its cure is long in coming, or is a cauterized apoplexia, or is corrupted, and a leg runs within so as to corrode the nail root, and greatly corrupts all of it, and greatly perverts the color of it.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that water which I have said in the division and do not agree with your cure, then cover that which is excessive of the nail root and cauterize the wound; for cauterization is beneficial in wounds.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May the bone be sound and the nail healthy, and the additions of the nail have already compromised the flesh to the joints, and they begin to hurt and cut them off, then cover those with a small amount of the medicine that burns and corrupts within so that it is all burned; and treat that with ointment within so that it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May the corruption already have entered into the bone, then cover that bone and extract it, for no time is healed when it is in the bone corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corruption and the corruption have gone into the finger, then you cut it according to which it is measured, and treat that within so that it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May the nail be pierced or cut, and if it causes a violent pain in it, then you draw blood from him at the beginning, and you dry the nail with a sharp knife through a transverse section above it, and be careful that the section does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause pain to the patient that is excessive; and treat that place with water that causes pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Some are born at the root of a joint, or in some nuts of the described fruit.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May who is born in some of the nuts described above is not affected, but those who are born in joints are very much affected.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born carnose, the section is light, and it is that you cut deep with a sharp scalpel at the root of this fruit.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May who is born in the root of a joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore you should keep away from its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May who is born in the described fruit, cover that you cut its flesh at the beginning with a rounded incision into the bone, and then close with one of those convenient nails, and then cure it within to make it well.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that happens in the described fruit between visible threads or by birth of a man who is born there, or by consolidation of plague or by burning with fire, or by similar means, then dry that consolidation within so that those threads return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Then place between them a thin leaf of lead so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them or place a leaf between them according to how long it takes for consolidation to occur.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if consolidation happens in some of the described fruit on the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fit it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the removal of four times, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The above text describes varicose veins, which are thick veins filled with excess fluid that appears in the parts of the body, especially in the legs, and more commonly in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who stand for long periods.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you administer a strong poultice on the body of black cholera with frequent bloodletting; and then draw blood from the patient's basilar vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May the cure of them by two methods: one is that it be cut and blood drawn from it; and the other method is that it be raised and all blood drawn therefrom.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of them by this method: immerse at the beginning the foot to water tail moving that black blood is resolved, which is fermenting from the foot; and then tighten the foot of the patient at the start of a loose sock within, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with wide sections, and then raise the black blood up to the patient' side away from the sock at the start of the joints within so that the quantity is exhausted that you want and which tolerates the virtue of the malady.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then dry it and order him to abstain from the foods that cause black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Then repeat the cure by bloodletting when the veins are filled with blood, and then ask the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May the elevation of them by this method: you who rasps the foot of the patient, if it is dry there, and then dip it in water tail moving that it hardens and the veins are inflamed; or that it exercises much exercise, if bath is not to your presence, within so that the member is cut.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then dry the vein in the right of the vein by section along its length or at the back of it you cut from the front, or at the top of it you sever it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then open the vein with sharp nails and cut the vein completely within so that it appears at the sight, and it is necessary for that blood to change color.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then you will know if that blood changes color.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then hang it up and suspend it so that it is raised and taken away from the vein, and then hang it with an ounce of gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then dry another section near that section by three threads, and then sever the vein from the top of the blood vessel within so that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that one and cut it in the back section you sever it from the top of the blood vessel within so that it is exhausted by the first section; and then remove that one from the second section it has been cut, and then remove that one from the part where it appears to be lifted up.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then make water come out of that section that is highest or further away from all sections, within so that everything is exhausted; and then cut it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey me in cutting it and raising it up, then put a double sharp needle and tie that one; or turn it on itself and cut it, or turn it around it all within so that it is tied up.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Then keep in mind that it is not cut; for if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to raise that one up, and it has come back on the patient by that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then when you have removed all of it outside, then place over the location of the plague the water that is submerged in vinegar and oil that is not rosy, and cure it within so that it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wine has been contracted without having rectitude according to what we have said, then you should cut it across all sections of that tortuosity and the locations of its wrapping; and then suspend that one with sharp nails within so that you lift it up completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Then keep in mind that you should not cut the vein and that you do not wound that one, because it is difficult for you to lift it up; and then use your caution with it.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision made by the vinegar:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the gold needle:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Is not to him accustom the needle in that way or is of an acute extremity so as not to wound the vein; and it is of great flexibility of gold, because if it was thin, it would cut the vein by its thinness; having such a surplus of thickness, then do it.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of a vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on tail-like feet so as not to get caught up in the sand of Arabic lands and in dry, arid lands with little texture and where there is no grass or sand.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is very much generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The growth of it is the decay that comes from within the foot so as to cut off the foot, and then draw blood from it; and then ask the patient to drink a mixture of poisonous snake, scorpion, and worm generated between the foot and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Then the sign of the arrival of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg, and then it swells; and then the vein comes out of that swelling which resembles the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you come to the end of it, then wrap yourself in a piece of lead from which its weight is two dragons, and do not remove it from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Then in many cases when you see any cause outside the parts, wrap water in lead and then cut it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	Then if it is prolonged, then you cut one section of the leg and wrap it in rawhide; and do not cut that one from the root so that it does not contract and enter into the flesh and cause a pustule and a sore in the part and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of him, and does not cause any obstruction in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein, some men have had it in their length of 20 palms and beyond; and now it has come to me that I should extract one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the hook into the hole of him and pierce that with a long hole through the body, so that all that is in the matter be evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that with the treatment of boils.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has some bumps, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from each bump;
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	So then heal that one as I said above, in the division and with water that is used above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because these worms live inside the bowels and are very few; that which is born between the grape and the meat, goes through all the body and causes pain to the animal, breaking the bowels and causing them to come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of him is by putrefaction of some fluids, so that worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malignity of him, because when he goes through the body and ascends to the head, and comes out at the mouth, then a great fever is raised in him and destroys the mouth; and there are bumps generated inside.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to heal it and extract him, then do not do it unless you have your own walk and appearance of him at the ready, and then cover that one who is above him with a dry cloth and pull him out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it has sunk into the flesh and you do not notice it, then pause cauterization on the place where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of him; so that it corrupts the flesh in that way.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see that animal come out at the throat near the belly, then strangle him with a strong constriction, and then dry him off, and extract him; and let the patient use medicine to evacuate dirty fluids, and keep away from foods that generate corruption.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section on disease of the Nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our language Nafir, and it is a pain that attacks some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing, which I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I was called to a sick woman in a village, and saw his arm swelling and discovering a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and because it was breaking for an hour, I saw that swelling go away with him, little by little; so as if it were living silver running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he sat down in the pain of that place and it stuck there in the muscle, and then came out little by little for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then it correks itself in the other side of the body until it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told by me that it twists itself all over the body, according to the second thing that I saw; and it marvelled me greatly at the change of him and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have already seen those bumps before in my hand, according to that way, but I have never seen the change of members as it is done now.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in the hands of the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think that it was in the woman because she is of the sex that does not have hair on the body; and in this way, the change of her appears like wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that you not appear according to this retro-curation in those who are delicious and have soft skin with veined legs.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to heal him, and the patient feels pain in that way, then do not appear at the throat as I said before; strangle him a little and dry him off where he is being extracted; and stop that wind with cauterization of the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see the bumps in the hands, then heal him with the extraction of the body and with water that expels wind; and take those pills made from rotting animals and those similar to them.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are different according to their shape, and according to the places of the body where they lodge, because their shape is varied: some have large tips, others small, others concave, others round; and those that have three angles, and those that have tongues; and those that are flat.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the second way in which the arrow is different according to the members and places of the body where it lodges: because the principal members are concaus, such as the neck, heart, and chest, and the lung, and the lungs, and the budels, and the bladder, and those similar to them; and when you avoid extraction of that arrow from any of these members and tie them together with a rope, then it is necessary for you to extract that arrow and heal the disease.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the necks is when the arrow enters through them and pierces the bones, and comes out of the back where it is about to come out, because it occurs with great violence; and scotomatous, vertigo, and stiffness in the hands, and inflammation and stiffness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and colicky vomiting, and a strong pain that causes the speech to be lost, and white discharge from it similar to pus, and a similar appearance to the wetness of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	So if you see these things in the neck, then do not interrupt the treatment or the extraction of the arrow; unless it comes out completely.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But if the arrow enters into the heart and is near the left armpit, and feels a hard thing in it that does not move easily, and does not see a hole; and sudden coldness of the extremities, and a grating sound, and fainting; and then you know that death has come.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the neck when the arrow has hit the lung and seems to emit foam from the plague, and the vessels that are near it and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes hard and asks for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow enters into the cloth on the foot and the pain is near the toes, and it feels a great pain with great violence and sighing, and does not feel any sense in all the members of the body.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow enters into the stomach, then there is a great pain with no movement in it, and there is a great indigestion of food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow enters into the belly and stays in it, then there is a cut of the skin or a budel that comes out, and there is no hope for the treatment of this arrow by extraction from the belly.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow goes into the bladder, and urine flows outside, and causes some harm to the outside parts, then the pain on the patient's thighs is very strong; you should know that this is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members, when it is the chest, the neck, the throat, and the shoulders, and assistants, and the spines of the back, and the loins, and the hip, and the thigh, and the leg, and their equivalents are saved according to the most effective measures when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend that you see if these arrows exist; so that knowledge of their treatment can be obtained quickly.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the case when a man has an arrow in his eye's lacrimal gland at the root of his nose; and I extracted it from him on another side, I cut off his earlobe, and it was healed, and nothing happened to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had gone into his ear' at the side of his cheek; I cut off his eyelid, and then the arrow was hidden; and it was not a small arrow, but one of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head on it, and there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And he is the Jew; and nothing happened to his eye for bad luck.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian which had gone into his throat; and it was an Arabic arrow, and there were no ears; then I inserted two guide-strings between the arrow and the neck of the man; already it was completely submerged in his throat; then I removed the arrow with care, and healed him.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man which had gone into his belly; he thought that he would die from it; and then, because it did not change for three days, despite the measures taken, I inserted an instrument between the arrow and his body, and healed him, and nothing happened to him for bad luck.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had gone into his buttocks; the plague settled on him; and then, after ten years, the arrow went into the space between his buttocks and legs.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had gone into her belly; the plague settled inside her; and it did not change the natural order of things in any way; and the woman was not affected by it in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had gone into his face; the plague settled and broke out; it did not cause any great pain, but looked like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king which had gone into his nose' side; it had already fallen to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him at the place where the arrow entered within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I removed the plague of the arrow from his right side; and then I inquired cautiously about it; and he did not feel that; but then he felt a prick on the right ear, and then he realised that this was caused by the point of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment to the place with a plastron; it is beneficial and digestive, and I declared to myself that this place would show me where the arrow was; so that it would dry up on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And the place did not become infected with bad luck because I had obtained that place; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for many days, and nothing happened; but the plague settled in between those days, until one day he felt the arrow come out from his nose; and he brought it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a strong, corrosive medicine to the plague for many days, until one day it was dried up; and at the trial I tasted that, and removed the point of the arrow which had adhered to the stick.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I applied medicine to the plague with strong, corrosive treatment within that time, until the point of the arrow appeared clearly to me; and then it passed from me by water for the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the plague grew worse, and I approached it with scissors, and removed it, and did not give it to anyone; but then, at the end of the chapter, I extracted that plague; and I restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And the judges decided that the cartilage of his nose had not been restored; and I restored it, and the plague settled, and healed him completely, without any bad effect.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows; so that it stops on its own; and this is not done because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in writing or by understanding.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise men know a little about it; and they do so by experience when such things happen; and they do new operations and use new instruments for removing the foreign causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And I say that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are stuck, but only by two ways: either because of the attraction of the place where they enter; or because of the opposite force.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which comes out by way of the place is attracted, or is an arrow moving in a fleshly place, and is thrown and comes out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey the hour when it is needed; then, after three days, leave it alone for a while; until you find meat that is near to it, and free from attraction towards it, and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And apparently if it is stuck in bones and you do not obey me by waiting; then leave it alone for a few days, and every day return to attracting and moistening it, and it will be thrown out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey me by waiting; then leave it alone for a few days, and if the arrow is stuck in any bone in any part completely, and its location has changed because of the movement of the arrow, then extract it with a sharp instrument.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already come into contact with one of the veins of the brain, and appears in the bad luck that I have described; then do not extract the arrow, and leave it alone for a while, because if the arrow pierces the skull, death will last longer.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is not stuck, but only in the middle of the bone and does not come into contact with the brain; then leave it alone for a while, because nothing will happen to it; then you will remove the arrow from its attraction, and from your attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is stuck, and you do not obey me by extracting it; then you will move it around in its course, as I have repeated, and then heal the place.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already stuck in its place, and it hurts when you touch it; then you will ask about that to yourself, and if you feel that pain; then you will throw that with some instruments for removing it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot handle it because of the plague's constriction and its length, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein; then you will handle the plague until it is increased, so that you can extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if he has his ears covered, then you should free the flesh from all sides with all the instruments you can; and be careful about it, if not in avoiding the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting those within that they become heavy.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps at all times within that it does not get heavy; and carefully from behind to the last detail so that the arrow does not break and that it is made with great difficulty from it and from that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that with your hand, then leave it for a few days within that the cuts that are in the circulation of it heal, and then repeat it when they are healed.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Or if you have pain from blood flow, then administer the water that we have said about cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your virtue of cutting veins or nerves, or strings, and administer instruments in all possible ways from your ability to avoid the arrow; and do so with ease and calmness and laziness and caution and you will be advised and told.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then make the arrow go against that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the arrow in him, because it is more helpful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Or if this is not possible for you, then administer the water that is possible for you according to figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Or if the arrows that are discharged contrary to the other part, or if you have already broken one of the parts from outside by hitting it with your hand on the corresponding cord and then moving it away; then cut according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then throw it away, because it is made lightly at most.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Or if it is stuck in the bone, then you should twist your hand according to the opposite direction within that the arrow presses on the bone, and make it bigger; and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat it while burning.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the tip of the arrow is in that place, then you should push it into him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Or if the tip is fallen and you want to administer an impact, then insert it, if it is deaf, into the cavity of the arrow with a pointed instrument; and then push it into him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Or if the arrow is hollow, then you should push it with a strong instrument into that place, because the arrow is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should cut all the flesh where it is, if this is possible for you; and then heal it with water that it heals.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has gone into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the ribcage, and it is close so that you touch that place with your hand, then cut it off; and when you cut it off, keep your virtue of cutting veins or nerves, and extract it, and if it causes disease, then heal it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps that the arrows are shot:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If the ends of your pliers have a hook, which they make with a knife when they grab onto the arrow, so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made special threads, big, small, and thin, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its weakness, and the width of the wound, and the contraction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of a pointed instrument that can be inserted in this concave end as if it were a knife, so that the arrow is pushed into him, and an impact from that deaf instrument:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of an impact from a deaf end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	with a click so that the arrow is pushed into him inside the hollow arrow, and it is driven into it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of bloodletting by veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Veins of bloodletting from which the blood used to be taken from. of those from which the blood is drawn in the head. and these are the veins that are pulsating: those in the temples, those in the cheeks, and those behind the ears; and this vein is prepared at the middle of the forehead, and this vein is in the end of the nose; and these two strings are on the jaw; and these two veins are on the lips on the right side; and these two veins are on the left side of the lip; and - these are the veins that are called algidic -; and these two veins are behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Or if they are taken from the arms, it is five. Or if they are taken from the legs, it is five. Because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it is called the wild lat, and the people call "vein of the head", and it is deaf, and it is a minor vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one the people's "vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein that is stopped in the domestic lat, and it is called "citillar", and they call that one the vulgar "vein of the belly"; and veins from the arm, which is stopped above the fire, and this is the vein that is extracted from it, and it is the one that appears clearly on the pout with a manifest appearance; and the save, and it is the vein that is between the two little auricles and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and chest there are three veins: the one of those is that it is on the left side of the curvature of the denolh of the wild lat; and the second is the sciatic vein, and its place is on the right side of the curvature of the denolh of the domestic lat; and the third vein is sophena, and its place is on the left side of the chest's curvature. And in the chest there are other veins that resemble those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juveant of the veins that run to the ears is caused by chronic bronchitis, emphysema and scrofula, and from ancient head wounds.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from those is according to whether you cut his hair or not: it is that his hair be shaved at the back of the head, and the scalp be fomented with hot cloths; then bring the patient around to their side where both veins are close together behind the ears in two places, which are buried in the hair; and examine those carefully. If you feel the pulse of those two places, there is no need for any further examination.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then bring the scythe, and it is that which is at fault, and put your hand below the vein in the socket where the blood comes out;
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand up to the vein and socket where the blood goes out, and cut the vein with a sharp knife.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the cut is the amount of two dice or more of water; and make a thread with the needle as long as you wish it to be.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten the knot, and let it lie there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this has been preceded in the beginning of the book with the cut and cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than the two veins that are cut in the bloodletting is due to ancient emulsion, and the sudden bad smell and frequent headaches, and the blood flowing out from the nose.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is according to whether I cut his hair: it is that he has his hair shaved at the back of his head, and that you see the pulse from his feet clearly without any difficulty; then you will be able to examine those.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then bring the socket up above the vein where it goes out at the tip, and insert it into the vein with a sharp knife; then bring the vein up in its place; and cut those other two veins as well; and make the blood flow according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then take off the patient's coat, and place his feet on the ground; then bring the knee of the leg over the vein for an hour; then tighten that knot, and let it lie there until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And this has been preceded with the memory of them, and of those the cut and the cauterization in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the bloodletting from the vein in the forehead is due to ancient headaches, emulsion and bad smells from the mouth; and from the head.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting from him is according to whether I cut his hair: it is that he has his hair shaved at the back of the head, and the scalp be fomented with hot cloths; then bring the patient around to their side where both veins are close together behind the ears in two places, which are buried in the hair;
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then put the point of the instrument on the vein at the top, and pierce it with a sharp knife or other means in the manner of your choice, and let the blood flow as much as you wish; then take off the patient' head and tighten that knot, and let it lie until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some people say that the bloodletting is late, but it is not true that this bloodletting is of extreme importance compared with the others; for the bone is soft and weak, and if this bloodletting were to be too strong, then the patient' life would be in danger.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More than the two veins that run down to the eyes are due to the patient' tears for pain and swelling of the eye sockets; and to ancient head wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient has his hair shaved at the back of the head, and those are cut with a sharp knife; then bring the patient around to your side.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the bloodletting be according to the transverse line at short length, for in this place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is gentle, then the strength of it is great.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood flow as much as you need; then tighten those knots, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More than the bloodletting from the nose is due to fierce fever and frequent headaches; and to ancient head wounds, and more so when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting from him is that he has his hair shaved at the back of his head; then bring your left hand to his nose and cut it gently with a sharp knife; then let the blood flow as soon as you can.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Note that you finish your work on the bloodletting little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then tighten it again for a moment, because it will be unfastened.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	More than the bloodletting from two veins that are cut in constriction is due to old age, and to the beginning of leprosy, and to sudden bad smells; and to frequent headaches and painful sores that corrode.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is that the patient has his hair shaved at the back of the head, and the scalp be fomented with hot cloths; then bring the patient around to their side where both veins are close together behind the ears in two places; and the scalp be placed on a table.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then cut the vein with a long, gentle bloodletting; then let the blood flow according to the time or more water as needed; and do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then take off the knots and tighten those two veins slightly so that the patient does not choke; then let them lie inside for seven days because the plague is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the bloodletting from these veins is due to old age, and to small boils and pustules in the mouth, and corruption of the gums and painful sores and cracks; and to bad sores that are in the nose and on the sides.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is that you cut his hair in front of you; then put your hand on his back, and bring the scalp around to the side where both veins are close together behind the ears; and examine those two veins carefully; and make one incision with a sharp knife for each vein.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Then if you are in doubt, leave those; and cut the one that is at fault, and examine those with bad pus on them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of those two veins that are behind the lips similar.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Then cut those two veins in front of the mouth.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More than two veins that are behind the tongue is due to bloodletting from the forehead because of old age, and to ancient headaches; and to ancient head wounds.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you bring your hand to the back of the patient' mouth, and lift up his tongue; then examine on the one side where the vein is close to the tongue, and on the other side where it is far away; and observe the color of each one as it turns darker.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then cut either one; and be careful not to finish your work on the bloodletting of those, for those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And those veins that are cut in the neck are those that run through all men, and the bloodletting from them is done according to two ways; or put them on sharp knives with slow cutting; or cut them with a pointed knife, and if they do not bleed, then use this method.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this annesthesis is that which is suited to section, and of those are special latents and subtle according to the amplitude of veins and according to the strictness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method for performing a phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	is that of opening the concave veins filled with blood and proceeding from thick vessels, and to those which contain heavy blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy for olives:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser latency and extreme subtlety of extremities, and is suited to phlebotomy of veins that contain subtle citric blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the improvement of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: take away the blood from the gut and the colon, and from there that goes to the feet and the legs.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is to be remembered by the phlebotomist, when he performs that phlebotomy, that he keep back and be careful there, for he may miss the vein and if he makes a mistake in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will injure the artery and cause bleeding, so that it is not convenient to perform that phlebotomy with a pointed cautery.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by clear sign, then know that you have missed it and change to another, or look for a little vein; or phlebotomize in the place where the arm ends, for that is clear; and dry up that with an annesthesis.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May if you wish to perform a phlebotomy on the arm, then know that in front of the strictness of the arm where you touch the place within which you know the place of the wrist, and approach over it; and approach the arm and dry up the vein with an annesthesis as mentioned above; and be careful that the percussion is done for a certain distance from the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press with strength the ligament, it inflates in the place where you have pressed over it; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so let it go.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in phlebotomy as the blood of a child and that blood is thin, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and put down and pause the knot for a long time; and approach the knot, and if the blood is cut off (for you see that it is cut off), then tighten the arm and let it go.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And look to the patient for any feverishness of the body, and be careful of that and do not hurt it for a few days within which it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May if the blood is not cut off, and you see that you must give medicine to water, then know that you should make a cut on the artery, if it appears to you; for the end of it is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take some scorser (a type of herb) and squeeze it, and extract the liquid, and put one half and tighten that over the place of the vein with the strictness of the ligament and within the powder within another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is cut off, it is fine; and if not, then heal that with water from which the feverishness of the place of the powder that cuts off the blood flow is remembered.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting off of the blood from him is difficult in different arrangements because of the small place of the pulse and the possibility of the ligature of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the phlebotomy of the black vein is very helpful in extracting the blood from the superior part of the head and leaving it to the body; for it is composed of veins from the basilic and cephalic branches, as mentioned above.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if the phlebotomist is careful in the phlebotomy of that arm, for it is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in the puncture of the phlebotomy and injures the nerve, it will cause stupor, and the healing of him is difficult to do completely, and even if he gets better it is not good for long; And this nerve appears with the pulse. And if it is hidden from some people and it is subtle and does not show itself, then know that you have stopped the phlebotomy at which point you are performing the phlebotomy with an annesthesis, and avoid the nerve with your grasp.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein according to its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The improvement of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood from the head and keeps the patient calm.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this especially, if you wish the phlebotomy to be performed with a phlebotomy scissor or with a phlebotomy needle; for it is the safest of all veins, for it does not leave the artery nor the nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But it is necessary to know by you that during the phlebotomy do not punch the head of the vein too much only, and seek out the place that is most suitable, and do not hit it at first with a percussion that is done for the first time with a phlebotomy; because if it hits it, it will hurt.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But strong pain is caused when phlebotomy is done in the first percussion; it is not noticed in this place.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy of that and the accidents that occur to it are important, in which you must consider its correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you must know that phlebotomy is not administered unless in the preservation of health and with the hope of avoiding accidents, and that it be done at the beginning of spring, at the start of summer, and close to winter, when it appears that it is coming out.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be performed on the third day or at the earliest time of three hours after the day has passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered causes convenience and necessity to water, or of a new day or of the same day, at any time and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is known that the heart does not pump for 12 years and women should not be phlebotomized if they have passed the age of 60.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to be phlebotomized in any way, know that you should specify the budels before phlebotomy with a leathern cord, if they have a fende retentive, so that the veins do not draw the superfluity during the phlebotomy of the budels, which are useless, and that they do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not phlebotomize the patients who are nauseous and have a tendency to vomit or have stomach pain or multiple pains, or those that cause diarrhea or work or sleep for meals or vigils or any other reason that destroys virtue, either in the body or in animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And you should consider the subtlety of humors before him if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medicines if he can to water.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into a bath if any reason does not prohibit it, or exercise for some exercise so that the blood is subtilized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of him in the feet of the day, which is the hour of third, as mentioned above.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And know that the foot of him is to be preserved on this day from all animal accidents, as when there is anger, fear, or any other bodily accident, as when there is work and unnecessary hunger and sleep.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And on his seat let the causes of the problem be present in the use of which men usually take with aroma and odour, and balm and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Then follow the flubber-maker on a cushion that is placed or that the cushion of the one who has to be flubbed is put;
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And bring near his arms and rub them with the flubber-maker two or three times; and bring near the ligaments and wrap them in cloth two or three times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let it be a tight fit, because the tightness that is not fitted, or the tightness is too much, then prohibits the flow of the blood; or if it is too soft and prevents the body from being tied up.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then bring near the tightness, and let him who has to be flubbed rub his hands together between them so that the veins are swollen, and are revealed to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Then bring near the flubber-maker unifies his hand with a little oil of an ancient remedy specifically; and bring near his free hand to the location of that vein, which you want the flubbing, so that the vein runs a little, and the percussion stops because the veins are those from which blood rushes out, so when you stop the flubber-maker on that one, it is discovered; and the flubber-maker does not tighten the vein, and if he tightens it, that vein is constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, because of all these things that the flubber-maker should be stopped and solicited in each one.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Then stop the flubbing, maybe if the vein is caught in a loop, then do not; and if not, repeat this process somewhere else, or on top of it lightly, if the location is not marked.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is marked or the patient shudders, then let it rest for a day or two and do not tighten the ligaments, because it will hurt severely; nor will it enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then repeat the flubbing if it is needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the glimpse is small and the pain subtly occurs, and you are afraid that it will not occur in the quantity that you want, then repeat the flubbing at that spot according to the right position and adjust in the glimpse a little bit, and do it lightly before the location is marked, because the location is marked in some men's case very few glances.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Maybe if that one has already been marked, then do not repeat on it, because there is no excuse for you to have any cause; and place your hand over some part of the back, because it eases the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And this spot is better than others that ease the body's pain.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And apparently administer oil of the back in all flubbing when you want to stop the flow of blood from a vein because of the pain of the body, and make it a little sweet and taste like a nut when stopped on that location, because the pain of the body subsides and spins when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of the flubbing a great swelling occurs, because it happens in a loop, and mainly at that one which does not bleed but that loop, or on top of the glimpse of a little vein, and then bring it out, and pause over that sponge soaked with water and salt, lightly cut, and hold it for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Then bring near the blood of the body from that vein according to him or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains at that location for a few days any black or green color, then do not notice it; and if you want to, pause over that spot with some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some other cause of mint juice or calamus or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And so the loops occur in the flubbing that is needed for a major flubbing from the base.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore pause your hand on that one, and if you feel a softness or pain in the compression on that one, then that eminence is evil and bad; and then keep in mind that you stop over that spot with some cause of water that I have said, because a lot of blood will flow from the arterial vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an impression with that water in which it is tightened, so that the location remains firm, and then cure that one with another cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	Then take from the body as much of its strength and as much of its color as it has, and let it be above the body according to what is seen.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the body is black, then let it rest and heal as much as possible, and if you make it thick, then let it rest and heal until it is soft, and if it is hot, then let it rest and cool down its heat.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	Then if that one is full of blood and strong and has a need to extract the body from a loop, then increase the flubbing of the vein and make the flubbing wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that one which is hot, then do the opposite, and if you extract it in two loops, then make the loop tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing that is administered in vein flubbing is to cut it across, not to puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this way of flubbing saves the body from blood flow and nerve injury; it is more praiseworthy and useful than flubbing according to its length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Then if you are used to fainting because of flubbing, then do it before the flubbing with a little bit of water in wine or simple oxymel cut; and extract from the body in three loops or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the body is cold and weak, then bring near to the flubbing a little bit of water in myrrh or honey flavored with spices so that it is warm, or in flavored water with aromas, or in scented water; and bring near a little spice for flavor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs because of flubbing, and it is caused by the flow of blood from a vein, then bring near to drink water and a little bit of honey-flavored water or warm water; and use aromatics in a little amount, and let the body be held with that hand.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that I have said in the division of fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to avoid his arms and dissolve his pain according to the second loop, then do it with water, and its virtue is to drink, and drink little by little, so that it is in proportion to the strength of the water in the days that follow.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Maybe who wants to avoid his arms, and take away his pain according to the third loop, then do it with water, and its strength is strong, and bring near water after seven or nine hours from the first flubbing.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Maybe who wants to remove pain from his body and direct it in the opposite direction of that part, then do so on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Maybe that body in which pain is already there and it is severe and causes fever, then do so with water from the first or second day, and let the hand of the patient be placed on his wrist near the heart, so that he does not die in place of fainting, because it happens in loops when the doctor neglects and is ignorant.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not when you want to release your arm and evacuate the pain according to the third loop, having already closed the orifice of the vein, and if it is difficult to extract the pain from that one, then press hard on it with vehemence and extend it slightly, because water is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the swelling has gone down.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity forces you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and it is not an excuse, then leave it on that spot or in another arm in some other vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “brace of the arm” is to be flebotenomated in place of the fistula or bazilica, when they are not blocked or closed, for it is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the fluabotomy of him is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water as long as the vein swells and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then strengthen it with a ligature of a narrow thread; and flebotomize it secondarily, not transversally or longitudinally, but according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And be the opening wide and be your fluabotomy with which you flebotomize it on the joint of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you prevent the flow of blood, then you should repeat to insert the hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from repeating to insert the hand in cold water, and the body is left in cold water during the winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the fluabotomy of this vein is more safe than that of all the other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the fluabotomy of the palm of the right hand is made in relation to the knuckles of the fingers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fluabotomy of it is that you strengthen your hand with a thread or with your own hand, more than putting it in cold water, for when you put it in cold water, the vein swells and is clearly seen; and then flebotomize it transversely; and if you cut that, you will not see it flow.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand away from fluabotomy, for it has the nerves of the bare skin denuded.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then return the hand to cold water and let the blood run into it, for if you do not repeat to put it in cold water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and the flow will be prevented.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then place your hand over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not solidify tightly; and apparently it seems like you have done nothing.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the improvement of the fluabotomy of the palm of the left hand is that it is in relation to the knuckles of the fingers.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And make a similar fluabotomy of him, as you have made of the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the improvement of the vein of the head in fluabotomy is to the parting of the hair, as it is to the mother's parting, and the retention of the menses, and the parting of the skin and ulcers of the legs and thighs, and their resemblance to the parting of hair.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the fluabotomy of him is that the patient inserts his head in cold water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; and place it over the joint of the neck with a cord; and from the location of the vein, he cuts it apparently as soon as it comes out; and from that same, it branches out on the face of the neck.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore fluabotomy the wide palm or leave the thigh apparently as soon as it comes out, for it is better and safer; and cut it apparently, for it is more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you flebotomize it on the face of the neck, then guard yourself from the nerves that are under it on the face of the neck; and make your fluabotomy in this way, as if you want to cut it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let it be known.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if you prevent the flow of blood; then return the head to cold water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fluabotomizer makes a mistake in the first place, then repeat to make the fluabotomy a little bit, for the location is safe; and do not fear it, but guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And apparently make of the vein of the other hand, engaging it.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the location apparently as we have said is to cut the skin from the parting of the hair.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the improvement of the fluabotomy of him is to the pain of the sciatic vein when it is caused by blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the fluabotomy of him is that the patient enters into a bath, and hurriedly and firmly presses his hand from the lap of the leg within four fingers in one long and thin cord, for it does not appear otherwise than by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you should make the fluabotomy of it according to necessity and in the second way, for that is better; or cut it with a knife or cut it with a saw, for the location is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the middle of men who are reduced; and if you feel that, and it does not appear to you from all, then make the fluabotomy of a part of him, and that which appears in both ears of the neck before the ear, and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the blood run in the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the tightness and place it over the location of the fluabotomy, tightening the location, for lightly it is healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of windiness and of the qualities to use those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Of windiness and of the quality to use those: for corns, or hair, or teeth.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And windiness is done according to two ways: one of them is cutting and extracting blood, and the other is windiness with cutting.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this windiness that is done by cutting is according to two ways, for it is either hot or cold.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places of the body where windiness is administered by cutting and extracting blood are twelve, of which one is between the neck and the shoulders, and it is the last parting from the head; and a half of the throat under the jaw on the side of the mouth; and two spatulas; and two hammers; and two chisels; and two drills; and two nails.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And windiness does not extract the blood except from the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and through it the virtue is not extracted by those veins, either by cutting for fluabotomy; nor does it cover that windiness is done by hot or cold in any malady caused by filling up the whole body until it is completely emptied.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity forces you to do windiness for a disease or continuously, then you repeat it at the beginning of the meal and at the end of it, and in its middle place, and whenever you want.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And the cause of this is that in men in whom the blood is multiplied within them so that you don't feel the extraction of it by windiness and you lose your head and sorrow, and darkness and stupor in their eyes; and in those is that their risings are multiplied; and in those is that their tongue is clotted with blood, or that it spits out blood; and in those is that their sleep is multiplied, and in those who sweat blood, and in those who have a dry mouth, and in those who have a burning feeling, and in those who have a bad breath.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And so whenever in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or half-way point of the month, then I command that ventilation be done before it has passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate relief from such ventilation at the nape is that when it presses down on the head and causes water to run down the throat; but also that it be promptly emptied from all of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not beneficial to use it on a person who has a complex mixture of diseases or a severe cough, as this can greatly harm them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And in no way should one apply it to the elderly, nor to those who have severe illnesses or frequent pain.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to the one who is already suffering from it, continued application of this is like causing forgetfulness; and I command that you tell the ventilation operator to pause his hand slightly from the area where they are applying it, out of fear of causing forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventilation with alcohol is in place of phlebotomy from the black vein and the basilic: but also causes asthma, contraction of air, and the splitting of the wind instrument, coughing, and hoarseness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the ventilation with alcohol is slightly stopped, for when it is paused from one side, it weakens the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventilation with ale brings on accidental pain in the head and eye pain, as well as headache, toothache, and migration of disease; it is in place of phlebotomy from the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And I command that you tell the ventilation operator not to press too hard on the skin so as not to wound the arteries and cause sudden flows of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation from one side brings on alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to those that occur in the mouth due to something else; it is in place of phlebotomy from elsewhere that it occurs on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But ventilation that is applied to the two spatulas brings on caphitan, which is caused by the expansion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And ventilation from the two inner openings of the mouth brings on quick relief from phlebotomy from three veins, unless it is from the basilic, black, or cerebral veins, for that one draws blood from all those veins more easily than from the flesh; and those smaller veins from the other larger ones so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And I command that you tell the ventilation operator not to cut too much skin off, for the location is bare of flesh, and leaves the nerves and arteries exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this ventilation is applied to the anus and brings on hemorrhoids of the buttocks and ulcers from one side.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And I command that you make a strong ventilation, and that it be gentle, for the location is able to bear strong division; and strong ventilation with sharp cuts, rather than cutting with a scalpel.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But very small windings from the legs bring about sudden pain throughout the body, and cause old headaches and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and cause both-and-bustle and aching of the joints. And it is in place of phlebotomy from two different veins, as well as from a large vein and an arc of veins, and from two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it greatly weakens the whole body, and causes syncope in young men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the windings that cause aching in the legs is proportionate to the relief brought by ventilation from two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the windings is that you pause the ventilation at the beginning to see and drain through rapid purification, and do not prolong the position of the windings; rather, pause them gently, remain in them carefully, and let the humors come to their place by gradual arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not repeat this several times, and continue within until you see the location turn red and swell and the appearance of the pain of stabbing;
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then scrape off and repeat the purification little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person with tender skin is prone to wounds, you should scrape off once and not more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And I command that you tell the ventilation operator to make the scraping wide and short, and to make purification easy.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the pain is severe, then scrape off twice, for in the first scraping you open up the path of subtleization to the pain and fluidity from it.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But also, in the second, to the acquired inspection of the extraction of the gross pain.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the pain is violent, then let there be scraping three times so that it achieves the final result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And lastly, when we want to extract small amounts of pain little by little or a small bit at a time, a single scraping is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a certain pain, scrape with an abundant scraping; and if the pain is known to be large, then scrape with a thorough scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of "scraping" where the depth of the wound is only limited.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, then let the locations of the windings be slightly gentle, open, and resolute; if it is in summer, then also with olive oil or violet oil, or mixed oil, or chamomile oil, or rose oil, and to those that resemble them. And if it is winter, then olive oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or rose oil, and so on.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superficial fat is thick and oily, then let the oil be amaryth, or balm mint oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and like them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the ventilation operator has large fingers, then let him not use oil, and that the locations of the windings be slightly gentle; and that the ventilation be done with cold water, or warm water, or steam, or salt water, or vinegar, and like those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the pain is of a moist nature, then wash your windings with wine, or water from merlot grapes and pomegranate juice, and like those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superficial fats are thick, then wash your windings with wine of old men, or water from marjoram, or a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and like those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the ventilation be kept in front of a bath; administered properly after one or two hours of bathing, and that it be slept in front of the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary for the administration of wind-wounding before phlebotomy.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And consider at the beginning: then, if the ventilation operator or one who should undergo phlebotomy is coleric and applies wind to the head and inflammation, then take cool drinks, as well as wine, honey, and lemon juice, and like them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then pause their meals; as for meat, let it be of medium size, and prepared with spices, and like them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the complex is of a middle age, then take in honey and almond syrup, or almond syrup with a hint of spice, and that it be eaten in the morning, and that meals be avoided of fish and birds and cats; and that a person use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause their meals of fish and birds and cats.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And when in the day of vomiting and of bleeding the drink is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And when given to drink in certain hours to some men the astringent medicine or alcaravea, or medicine of musk, that is musk, or acacia before vomiting or before bleeding or nearby, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not good that they take that cut.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the vomits that are made by sacrifice be kept until they are ready in the body, and above the foot and the joint, and above the navel, because these members do not suffer sacrifice on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And do not want those to be attracted by the blood of a member, so when a vomit is kept until it is ready in the body, and above the foot and joint, and above the navel; for these members do not suffer sacrifice on themselves. Now when you keep a vomit over milk in a malady of flux of blood from the blood of the member of the nares; and use that so that the blood is dissolved, fresh and soft to the member, so when it is kept over the navel and belly button; for that rarefies the member and scalfies it and makes the pain easier because it resolves the vomit.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And is kept over the pillows when it happens in their illness or fever, because by virtue of strong attraction light blood is drawn out and the fever is rooted out from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And seems like it when kept over the body and navel, ready vomit in those locked up.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These vomits are given by sight with juice only; and some are given by fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vomits are given full of running water in the malady of the navel.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that water is to fill the vomit and be larger, it is fresh water alone or water in which herbs are boiled according to convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of vomit given by fire: is the opening width of two fingers, according to what we have formed it; and the quantity of the fluid be the majority of a palm; and be in its center, in the place that is in the path, most of it, the tray is small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made with an acrid juice or citrus, with large margins, lion, înguale and ternary, so that it does not harm the member to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And is made in half of it a transverse wedge of acrid juice or iron, where it is kept burning by the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this vomit is much greater than that which we have described before; and the little less of that which is suitable according to the illness and the condition of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the vomits of the sick and exhausted are other than the vomits of young people and robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of keeping this vomit by fire on the member is that he extends the fire to the fire of wood well ahead of a small candle of wax, and keeps it in the middle place of the wedge in the middle place of the vomit, so that the fire burns around the part of the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And is kept over the member of the patient, and is over the tray which we have said, until when you have vomit and do not want to hold it in your hand and let the steam burn that tray, then the vomit is taken out slowly dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you don't want that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May the vomit that is given in the malady of the pleurisy, with water, in which there is not a transverse wedge or tray, and it is not given except to be filled with water, and is kept over the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the form of it: And this vomit, how much greater it is, so much better, so that it receives a great amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter  .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguineous are not given in the head or neck members but in the members in which it is not possible to position vomits, because of their smallness, so when they come out and gingival and similar to their taste; or on a naked member of flesh, so when said and the nose and similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have been found to be in the water of the world's mouth.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And are removed in the day and night in water two, unless they are hungry, and do not cause a rumble in the stomach of those; and are evacuated from the body at the beginning by bleeding and vomiting; and the member of the patient is rubbed until it turns red; and are kept over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled up and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible juice of the place is kept in vomit, it is better to do so.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, washes the place with water and keeps it moving water; and is rubbed and pressed out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the member is prolonged to the place of the blood suckers, and it is water, then put a cloth of leather in running water, and keep that over it until the residue is washed away.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder vitriol tri-salted on it, or rub and similar to their taste of the causes that are stinging, until the blood is washed away; or are kept over the place the majority of dried beans, and are removed until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is washed away.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And when necessary, a repetition of blood suckers, as much as possible, change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And when the blood suckers are forbidden by suspension, then the place is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is placed in the places where it hurts; and are kept over, because those cause pain when there is a little blood.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall down, powder on them a little tri-salted aloe, or salt, or ash, and sometimes quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, son, know that the jesters of this chapter are not for the common doctors and the vulgar, nor did any one at any time look at the free books of the Ancients or read a word.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason is made that this way of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it in any part of all time; and I have not presented it as long as reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And is directed to experiments and studies in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described all this in this chapter all that contains my science and about which is passed the greatest experiment of my life; since it has made you, who are far away, free from occupation and long hours; and it has renewed itself at the end of renewal; and has shown itself at the end of declaration; and has formed it into different shapes of the instruments that are given to them, with addition to declaration, as I have made it in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	First chapter.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Now let's say that I should state in the beginning of this chapter the first principles of the discourse; and those chapters to the understanding whereof it is necessary that the craftsmen should be firmly fixed on the truth of those, so are you and those who are prompt at knowing or learning this noble art better than yourself.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Now I shall say that whenever an injury like a fracture, dislocation, twist, or sprain occurs, at the beginning it is necessary to perform bloodletting, bleeding, or some other treatment, unless there is a prohibitive cause; but then treat with remedies of virtue, or if it is the injured person, or old age, or a time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then let him be content with his own food of herbs, and of birds and crabs' meat; and prohibit heavy meats, or filling himself with food, and all food that fills the veins with blood, as long as you are sure there will be no vomiting, and if you do not fear effluxion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to his normal state at first; for it is usual that he should be kept in bed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And now that the broken bone has begun to be restored, let it be said that the patient should be fed with nutritious food of milk and strong, dense, and heavy substances, in which there is viscosity; also with water, rice, cabbage, and vegetables, and fresh milk, and thick and similar foods to those, and with this regimen the fracture begins to coagulate more lightly and more gently.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that broken bones in old men and in children cannot be made whole and solid according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are made whole and solid according to their nature for ever by the drying up of those limbs, and they are made whole and solid in the end of laziness, as is the case with the bones of little children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature, however, adjusts and glues together the broken bone from all sides by a certain gluiness that adheres to it and strengthens it until it is completely joined together; and at the beginning there is fire, so that there is no prohibition in this case of doing her works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you should abstain from feeding the patient with food of gravity, viscosity, and weight, as I have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There are various kinds of fractures according to the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, as a fracture of the neck bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and all the other members are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I shall now proceed to recall for you every kind of fracture, distinguishing it from others in a separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There are various kinds of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of fractures of the bone within themselves are diverse; for some occur in the arc of the bones and others occur at their ends; and some occur according to the length of the bone: and some are caused by a blow or injury and some occur spontaneously, as when they are prepared to write, and a small fracture occurs in the head, and a fracture is caused by a headache.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each kind there is a different way of restoring it; for some require time and patience, as they are recalled in their place in the chapters.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There is also a symbol for a fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is an enlargement and prominence that can be felt with your hand, and feels sharp when touched.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And now, whenever you do not find the prominent spot that can be felt with your hand, and the patient does not feel great pain when you touch his bone with a gentle motion; then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	And then, it is possible that it is a prominence or small fracture, but do not say that you feel it with your hand and with a gentle pressure on all of it; and if you remember the moment when you touched it, then let it be tight by gradual tightening.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the place where it is arched and does not split into two or any other kind of fracture occurs in the satagia; and whenever it splits all at once from its center, then start to make amends to it right away, as soon as an aphorism causes a wound.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an aphorism causes a wound, then leave it for several days until the wound stops bleeding; and then take care of it in any way you can by levitating and creating it.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that restoration of the limb and its healing is lighter than a fracture in the limb where such an injury occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen it according to what comes next in your recall of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there are two satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to amputate the broken member from the upper or lower part; or from the middle if the member is small; or from one side and the other by dividing it with a cord.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be in a position that you stop the limb from moving naturally while the broken part is extended; then pierce it so as to make it join together, and in any way you can put it back in its place.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care that you do not cause injury or pain to the patient through your own operation, nor pierce him in any way; and by means of the power that you possess, join one bone to another according to its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then take care to do this at the right time; and if you find any other cause, correct it and put it back into its place with the quantity of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And he has a violent extension and compression; for this causes aphorisms that cause wounds because of his own operation, or that cause pain in the limb when you see it with your eyes because of his own operation.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then bind it firmly and securely, and make a tight bandage on it, so that the limb does not feel pain in its position; then change its position from one to another, so that you do not feel pain; and take care that the position of the limb be firm and secure, so that no fracture occurs when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the firm fixing of the limb is this which I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs are different in their smallness, in their size, and in the form of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And those that are small like a little arm or hand, and the bandage is of thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And those that are large like the leg or hip, take care that it be wrapped around and firmly fixed; for the binding around connects the large bone and strengthens it with a bandage from all sides, so that there is no gap in it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then take care to stop bleeding, and pause it gently at the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to how much the member deserves; and strengthen your hand with the bandage a little.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then look at it carefully and take care not to tighten your hand too much at the place of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that it does not feel pain when you move your finger a little.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And if it is necessary to stretch further into the area of the fracture a little, and to soften gradually the tightness little by little, until you can grab hold of a large portion of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another object and wrap that other veil over the area three times, and leave the wraps a little further back from the fracture; and your operation in the tightness of the first wrapping and in softening that second one as we have said above in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And place between the wraps of tarred leather or cloth that is wrapped around the area where there is some curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and in no way do so for any other reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And place between another object, and wrap those other wraps around properly for a long time, if there is no swelling or abscess in the area, then pause over that water where that abscess is located and which causes swelling; and leave it for some days; and then you tighten them again.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the sticks are of different sizes and made properly; or of reed reeds, or palm fronds; and be the width of each strap according to this shape and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the strap which is placed over that fracture be a little thicker and a little wider on one side than the other straps, and according to the length of the member in its size and thinness; and place another object under those wraps according to your first tightness; and remove those wraps gently according to the way we have said above for tightness, and that is your tightness according to the location of the fracture, and how much it is increased from the fracture, then tighten it a little.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the strings be of medium thickness and thin; and if they are thick, then do so with a needle made from the skin of a snake, for if you cut the tightness in equality, then there will be a great mistake when the tightness is increased.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And especially thin strings are not convenient because you will not be able to get a good grip with those strings; and it is not necessary that there be a space of a finger between each strap.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is tied by the ends of the straps to the tightness in those places, then pause for a moment with that tarred leather or woolen cloth until there is no injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by a fall from a height, and there is dislocation of the tendon, and I remember that in the chapter according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a broken limb does not tighten with the wraps on the first day; which is why, when it is large, it is necessary to pause for 2-7 days or more, according to your certainty of the coming of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way that the old surgeons used to do it, they wrapped them over a fracture and dislocation and twist.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A way to wrap like a shower of restoration of fracture, suitable for complicated cases and mainly for women and children, because it is not necessary that there be heat or friction: and that is because you take powder of flour, and it is the meal of flour that spreads very slowly on the movement of the mill in the parts of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And in such a case as this, not only do you crush it, but you grind it with an egg white, and apply a very thin spread; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to wrap and repair fractures and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, aniseed, and mastic, which is derived from the wild fennel, and all are mixed with water or milk of one thousand dragon's weight; of mirra and aloe, a dragon's weight each; alochile, two dragon's weight; and all are cut finely and mixed with oil of hyssop or albumen if the body of the patient is scarred; then use this plaster, for it has good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way to wrap and repair fractures and twists: Take a dragon's weight of myrrh and aloe, a dragon's weight each; of acacia, six dragon' weights; and Armenian bole, twenty dragon' weights.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of them are crushed in a mortar and mixed together, they are sifted, and they are mixed with very little water or egg white and applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A way to wrap joints and bones that are separated from their locations, causing pain in those places and splitting them or breaking them; take wool yarn, immerse it in wine and oil, and place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	It is not useful for this wrap to relieve an abscess, or to expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way to wrap and restore broken bones is: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them together, and make a paste out of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A way to wrap and administer a new preparation for the relief of an abscess, and also for the resolution of pain; take razins of aloe, camomile flowers, violets, flour of ergot, all of it together. They are all crushed and mixed with a little wine, if the member is not scarred.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scarred, then crush those together with very little water from coriander or use that water and apply it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way to wrap and administer a strong preparation for the resolution of this first one, which is caused by an abscess; take razins of aloe and licorice root, fennel seeds, marjoram, violets, camomile flowers, all of it together; they are crushed and mixed with very little water from sage or double-strong water or wine, depending on the quality of the member and the repose of the color of the blood.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But the hypocrisis should not be wrapped with wax that is placed over the member in order to restore it, but with oil and nothing else for cause; and it is necessary that it be very thick or very thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But with the use of gall nuts it is seen that they are placed over the broken member in order to restore it and for the causes of exsanguination with small quantity of quality; such as those mentioned above: mirra, essences, and similar to those causes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A way to wrap and relieve injury and pain is by taking a paste of meal, ashes, hair of a man or bird's feather, salt, and aloes; they are crushed and sifted and mixed together, and the wrap is very thick; it is then applied.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity should be such that it does not cause pain or trouble, and that the member is not moved from its location; then you do not remove for any time.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is pain or trouble or swelling at the location; then you should take it off in that hour, and then apply the wrap to the area.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take cloth of linen and marine sponge, immerse that in wine and water, and scrub the area until there is no trouble or pain, then rest the member for an hour; and then place that wrapped cloth on it for an hour, and then pause over linen yarn immersed in wine and oil, or rosewater, and let it sit for a moment until you are certain of the absence of an abscess, and that it stops swelling the member, and it is relaxed after pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And repeat that same stricture, smear a small paste and do not tighten it for your first constriction, and with subtlety apply that inner part so that it is cured.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if many times the puss, the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already gone away, and you no longer need paste or constriction, then do what I have said above, but with a different order.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if nothing happens to the member from those causes that we have said, then do not wait more than three days or four or five; and some have waited all this time for twenty days according to what I have said before, until the fracture has healed and placed on it a coagulation of the blood over that one.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the constriction more than in your first constriction, and adjust the thickening of the patient's food, according to what comes before his memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you find that place of the fracture is completely dried out and more than not covered, then know that the food is forbidden to reach it; and therefore immerse that one in lukewarm water every day that has passed since its drying, and let a small constriction remain on it, and with this operation allow food to enter the member again, and heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And if the food that regenerates the fracture of the member is completely dried out and more than not covered, then know that it has been regenerated in error according to its operation, and great fear, and if it were to be consumed by a dog, it would make the large ones free and they would run away from the water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone drink that water, so that is more reasonable than it makes no difference.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of the fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are pieces, and the figures of them are various, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by the impact of the hammer, and that impact stops all the bone inside the case, which is left without a bone, so that if it breaks in the middle, and that break does not pass within the last part of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levitation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and the fracture that is contrary or opposite; and its cause is impact with a pole or a wall, and they have a similar appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, so that it approaches the skin from which it is left without a bone; or in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And some fractures are so that they are embedded in the bone, in its subtility of fine hair, and with this one is called this species of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is a fracture that is caused by either impact or percussion of a stone, and to it corresponds, which makes a part of the bone enter from inside, and is made in the concave cavity as if you were to hit the roll of an egg when hitting it with a hammer and splitting its shell.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly this is made in the bodies of bones, as if they were caps of enfants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And therefore all these species of fractures are bad, and they are similar to those that separate the stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come to your memory of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I have learned all these species of fractures by detection from those and by inquiry about them, as well as by the appearance of rotten meat that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known by the same that appears on the bone, and is dried up, and placed on it with a thread, since the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and if you find by manifest sign that means pain, such as vomiting from cholera, and fainting, and loss of memory, and absences, and syncope, and acute fever, and nausea, and the appearance of the accident on most occasions, it is not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not find those accidents that do not correspond to your expectations, then begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	That is because if it has come to you the plague at the beginning when it was plagued, and it is in the winter days, then know that you study the appearance of the bone before day twelve according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you keep the bone out of the skin before day seven, since the bone is left without a skin, and those accidents occur that we have recommended.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the skin covering the neck, and is split into small pieces, then know that you burn the split one, as I have recommended to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that is because you make the head of the patient infected, and discover on the bone according to its usual and appropriate way as the figure of the infection, and let it be light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you the detection of the bone, then pause it with a cautery of san or poultice, then know that you put on the skin infused in oil and rose water, and allow the pain to subside until it is calmed down, and be sure that the flow of blood stops; and then begin at the circumference of the bone and its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	That should be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you cut the bone with an incisor of strength, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor less than that one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer a larger incisor than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Then know that you have several incisors of which some are less sharp than others and some more; and those of them are at the end of their sharpnesses, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily in percussion on the incisor that you do not feel pain, and this one touches your head, and let him be guided by his position.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you perforate it in front of its circumference before administering the incisors with the tweezers, which are called non-deep tweezers.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called that way because those do not stop the end of the bone from reaching out to him, but because with this one stops the blood from flowing through the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these tweezers, as many as are appropriate for the texture of each bone, as far as it is present in all testes from the head to its extremity whose tip is sharp, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of the texture of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of tweezers: The quality of piercing in the circumference of the broken bone is that you pause the tweezers on the bone and twist them with the tweezers within what you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another place, and pause what is between all the amount of the thickness of the thread or turn it there.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And approaching the incisers here there is between each turn of the bone, and make that subtle pus that you can on it in the end of levitate, so as we have said, within which root the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument by which you will prepare to water, so as to heal and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And keep in mind that the inciser does not touch any cause of the cypher.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, when you have gone around the bone, separate the cypher if it continues, and extract that, keeping in mind to cut and pull that in the asperity of it from the bone which is another instrument similar to an inciser, but more rather than that pus be thick and subtle that the others incisers.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is a small piece of the bone coming out and hanging, then take it with ease with water that you have from the instrument; and approach that cure the plague with leech and dip the ones that we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is less dangerous, far from fear, which cuts Gualia and the loof for great relief; and this is the meaning of it: It is necessary that you begin to uncover the turn of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and obvious, so that when you have uncovered that turn and have stopped for a moment the extremities of this inciser gentle and easy of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	That the turn is round it is strong and does not incise any cause, and the sharp turn is of him in two sides before in length, so as times; that the turn is adjusted to the cypher by the face of it cutting the sharp turn in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And approach the inciser of a turn on a small piece within that you cut all the bone easily so as it is turned over, and you are sure of the pain that does not happen in him in any way, and if the medicine was the pus of all people and the most ignorant about them; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there is a cause of the cypher attached to the bone in some places of the bone, incise that from him with the tip of the inciser, and free it easily, for it is freed from him without doing any damage or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the cypher, and the water that has been cut off or remained on the bone is in its face, and there are small and sharp asperities in it, then approach that asperity and cut those sharp ones with sharp subtile razors by which you have prepared the number, of different quantities so that you can administer them in all places the pus convenient to them and the most right of them according to the water in which your operation is lost; that bone broken and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And keep in mind that you administer the water according to the tip of your razors on which you cut the bone at the beginning, and use near him the subtile water of him, and do not stop making water according to continuity until you reach to administer the most right water of them all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in any other small fracture and subtle fracture, keep in mind that you administer the cure according to the water which you lose on the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is the cause why they have not applied all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	He shown us in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the cypher is round when you cut the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the plague, and dip that in rose oil, and place that on the orifice of the plague; and take another cloth folded or tripled and dip it in wine and rose oil, and place that over the first cloth and make the water most gently that you can over that, which does not damage the cypher; and then administer over that cotton thread, and do not tighten it except by the quantity that has the plague so only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the pus; and then remove that and then administer medicines with which it is superfluous to dry out, such as rawhide and flour, and powder of enses and aristology, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	That you make of these medicines powder that you sprinkle over the plague when it is dry; and in general, administer in that all medicine of its property by which it is dried up and not chewed.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep in mind that, according to your virtue, the plague in your cure is clean; and it is not in him surdicia of enguent or other; nor does he leave adding virulence on him; for when it is adjusted on the skin of the head, it corrupts him and gives it, and causes the disease close to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And you happen on the skin of the head, when it is completely removed from him the bone and more so when the cure of it is expressed, and it is darker on its surface; and then consider now if you happen to the plague that we have said, you know that it is dangerous in all its forms.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not happen blackness but only of the medicine that is stopped from it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a piece of honey and a piece of rose oil. and line them with a cloth, and approach that to the cypher; and then cure that with the spices of cure which suit you so that it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that it is not broken from the nose but only two pieces of cartilage above the skin, or one of those nettle-like bones; for because there are two bones, because the turn of them is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not happen to him only pain and tortuosity and sinuitate.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if it is broken from one of the two pieces of him, then take the little tip into his nose, and make that fracture inside by the little tip, and outside by the big tip, so that it returns to the nose according to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do it for him with ease, and keep in mind not to damage by that your operation on the head of them.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost cartilage of the nose, and that does not continue to it, then approach that with the tip of the inciser to the end of it which is small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two pieces, then you make a simulacrum of it.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And keep in mind the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture if it is possible; and if not, then approach the seven days to rest the plague.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And approach the end of the nose with a cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one turn, or two pieces, and be in the thickness of the nose as much as it fills the turn of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say some of the old restorators that the calças are wrapped in cloth, and they are exchanged throughout the day, but I have not seen it; keep in mind that the cloth is wrapped in album of four-fold comfit with powder of mol; and then leave that one until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has been hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some are wrapped in the nose, in place of one, unless it is wrapped in linen cloth; and be that you have already broken the nose from a violent pain and that the disease is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make water.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another type of blister occurs, apply cerottes or cotton pads soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or a scalpel.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May if that doesn't happen, then you should cover it with flour and castor sugar soaked in egg white; and place your hand on the area, and don't do so because of any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	May if your bones are broken or crushed, then you should cut them open, and remove the bones with the appropriate instruments; and sew up the wound, and treat that water which enters and hardens, and apply poultices to that water that convenes.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if plague occurs inside the nose, then you should treat that with water and administer lead tubes inside because it is completely cured.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the fracture is not caused by plague, consider whether it is only a little out of place and not curved at the sides, then its recovery will be easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce that same little finger of the right hand; and push those bones apart from each other with ease at the sides, at your own hand's other end in the direction of the break; and arrange those bones carefully.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if that fracture of the mandible is separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of two parts according to the right direction so that its position can be made equal.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you experience a concussion of the teeth and a disruption occurs, then strengthen those which you hope will remain intact with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; and place cerottes on the broken mandible, and place a double sheet of cloth over it, and place a star-shaped piece of cloth carefully over it, or a single thread according to the length of the mandible; and bind that below according to your custom and how you apply it, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and pause his food with sips of warm wine.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been changed in any way, then you should lie down and wait for three days; and correct what has already been altered, and cover it with flour, egg white, or chamomile powder, because you have removed the cerottes from it, and place wool over the covering.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And after that is set and adjusted, leave it alone so that it does not change its position, until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for those who are seen to heal this fracture in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another type of blister occurs, administer the water that we have mentioned above in the patient''s seat so that it is healed and that blister remains; for those who are seen to heal that blister.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is caused by plague, then consider whether it is a bone separated or broken in two pieces; then you should introduce those bones into water that moves them apart from each other.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the hole of the plague is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have stopped those bones from moving apart, and they no longer move, then sew up the hole of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place one of the poultices that moves them so that it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter. v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Restoration of the fork when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A broken fork occurs at the front part of the muscles, and that fracture happens in one of these three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Either it is broken, or separated, or separated into two pieces so that it doesn't cause separation; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens as a result of plague in the fork, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens as a result of separation in the fork.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is caused by plague, is that you present two ministers, so that one holds the assistant and the other extends the fork broken at the sides.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And bite that fracture with the fingers so that its shape is formed according to how it has broken, and don't make it high or a depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you want to extend it, then place the patient' bed with hope of cloth or wool, and make its size according to your need; and extend and raise the fork, and cover that end with your hand so that it is extended according to how it has broken.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you can' reach the end of the fork to the sides, because it reaches the neck, then place the patient face down on their back, and place a pillow under their chin, and place one of your hands in the middle in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscles of the patient to the sides so that the fork bone is raised as it reaches its neck, and then you straighten the fracture and bite it with the fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	May if you feel a pain in the fork that is getting worse, then cut off that and remove those pains easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should use the same instrument that you used to attach water so that you have stopped that fork with something sharp. And this instrument is from wood or iron, and its shape is like this:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is like any vessel whose shape is like this; and make its length according to the water that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length be according to what you can do for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end is wide and the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague that you have cut out from the bone is wide, and confident of a blister, then you should join the two lips of the plague with a stitch.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if that disruption is small, or you fear a blister, then you should use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the plague' s split.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if that happens, put cloth in vinegar and olive oil, and place that on it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May if the bone is broken in two parts and cut, then you should stop that with flour of wheat mixed with egg white, and place that on it over the back, and bind those bones together; and may if there is any pain in it, put a pillow under the patient' chin, so as not to feel that pain. And if that happens, then you should wrap that in cloth, and put that on a table with the size of three fingers or more; and place the bone wrapped in cloth on top of that table, and place a plate of wood there, which is long, and make its length like this; and bind that bone with cloth there; and if it does not hurt you then turn that over, and wrap that wrapped bone again, and reduce that wrapped bone from all sides. And when the patient feels better, then return that bone to its place.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all, that the star of the broken bone is not too long; and for this you will see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is softened or the star has been completely healed, then you correct it and tighten the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient's sleep on their neck, and let them lie on their side with a small cushion under them; so that by doing so, it is raised the assistant of him from the nape of him, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is lifted to elevation of the muscle; or is the arms of him bound to the neck of him.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament if it does not happen in the place immediately or swelling within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see the face of him wet with water, and tighten it and restore that one and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some have seen in certain men it is done in the space of time of that one.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula pie is broken in the place of him late and not broken of him but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken the place of him — and is broken in the middle place of him — and is not known except by touch, then according to that figure of the fracture is prepared you for reducing that one according to the natural figure in all ways so as to engineer the same, the which is at your possible will.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place over the place powder of mill the white of egg and stop it with leather; and place a cloth double; then place over him the star light according to the quantity of the spatula whole or a little less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	More if you leave the star is a concave cavity in some of the places of the spatula, then you engula that concave cavity with stopa leather, and place the star according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then tighten it with a long thread of cotton or silk and with the tightness of the star until it is not remounted on its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all seen that is softened, then another seen and tighten it and equalize the star if it has been remounted on its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	You have already opened the patient' s nape.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And is restored in twenty days or on the 25th day.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when that number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and that you know assuredly because that one is of the bones whose beginning is not broken nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you process the place of the bone heavy and leave the ligature, then you cut it over him, and let go; and do according to that we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadness or swelling caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot in some seen is broken in the middle place of him and is pie cut inside; more the ends of him move inside that they are ciccadas and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of him when it is broken the middle one of him is that it declines to the inside parts and happens to him great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and hoarse voice, and fort levitate, and vomit; and is declared in his cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And is restored him is that he be lifted the patient on his two legs, and place between the ribs of him a cushion; and squeeze the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him to the sides of the two ribs, and subtilize in the operation of him and in the equality according to all ways that it is possible to do and that you bring back into water, within that returns the figure of the bone according to what happens.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place over him the plaster and staves and place open the star of a table subtile of saw or of chalk and of its likeness in levitation, because you wrap that one in cloth; then subtilize that one is placed on the broken bone that it is not remounted; and tighten it according to roundness at the back some seen, and tighten it with a tightness decent; and then consider the ligature in all hour, and when it is softened, then strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes to desillusion of that one you have corrosion or pruziment, or pain, or swelling that happens in the place, then you cut off and undo that one and eradicate the plaster and correct it that happens by water according to a way of cure of him; and then reduce the plaster, if times into water the face; and adjust the tightness until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of Restoration of Ribs When They are Broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of the ribs happens only in large places which meet each other; and of the ends of them from the split forward does not happen to those contusion because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not hidden from feeling; therefore the inquiry of him with the evidence.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And is restored him is that it is covered the fracture with the evidence according to the possible way, within that it is swallowed according to what happens; and place over the broken bone the star, if you have indignation of that one.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the inside parts, then it happens to the patient great pain and puncturing, so that it happens to him that has weeped, and for water because the bone has the veil; and happens to the difficulty of being cleaned, and hoarse voice, and vomiting of a strong voice; and this one is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the old ones are made firm with those by means of which it is strengthened.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them so that you say: Cover that you put the feed of the patient which produces inflation and ventilation, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	More we should not put him by water because it is not a light cause to generate swelling if it happens, unless it happens; and if it has already happened, then help by water.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And say some of them that it is suspended by the wind and placed over him to suck strongly; and it seems like reasoning, more however it is feared that the wind will throw away the superfluity to the place because of weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And say some of them that the place be covered with a cloth which has already been submerged in oil if it happens, and let staves lie between the ribs until it is filled, that the ligature be opened when you wrap that one according to roundness; and then be healed the patient with the cure of pleurisy of feed and of medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the cause is violent is to be restrained the patient which does not suffer it, and the bone has the veil punctured with heat, then you fear for the patient, then cover that they split over the place, discover the broken rib, and place a sharp instrument that preserves the cipher, the reminder of which is preceded, and I write the bone according to ease, and take out that one.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then place over the two lips of the flay, if it is large, with a burn; and heal that one with plaster within that it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if swelling happens inside, then you cut off and place in oil rose water and place over the place, and is healed the patient with water that covers swelling inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And be lifted up on the bed on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the spine of two and the collar.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some broken ends of the bones of the neck, and then to their atrail, and likewise to the spine of two.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when water happens to a man and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then consider, for sometimes his hands are already softened and stupified and dead and they can't move them or stretch them or tighten them, and when you squeeze them with needles or pierce them with a pin, and there is no pain in them, then you should know that it is not healed, and in the same circumstances it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel a contraction in them when you squeeze them with needles and pierce them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the hernia is healing with cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck wet, and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the man.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If they have already become softened and you want to know if it is due to water that happens in the most cases, and when you get on their back, they vomit and cannot hold it, then you should know that it is fatal, and do not attempt to heal them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter in kind.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the healing of him is that you pierce into the cavity of the hernia, and place a pad on top of the spine attached there, or a cloth wrapped around it, or a piece of cloth laid over it; place something soft on that part for some time until it is soothed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place a comfortable and soft pad on it, and tighten it with a ligament; and order the patient to rest and be peaceful and not sleep on the bed where he has pain, until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia of the bone has already separated from it, then cut it with a knife and remove that bone; and then join the two ends of the skin together, whether they are large or small, and then heal those that are inflamed with an ointment, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the bone of the leg is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then cut a small piece from the heel of the foot on the left side, and join the two ends together with a pin as close as possible in kind; and then place a pad on it and wrap it up tightly, if you feel pain from those, and tighten that part.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel a hernia in him, then pierce it and heal that with the cure; until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter.x.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are often broken, and when they are broken, their fracture is not but common in the ends of them and they decline to the openings; and water happens to the patient's pain and pricks, and the chest is stupified when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the healing of him is that you stretch your hand over him until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of him.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in one end of him, then you should dress it with a garment that fits him well, as close as possible to his natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long part or has already declined to the openings, then you should prepare the patient' s belly for your healing of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have dressed him, place a pad on it, and then place the cloth of fust or of codenda over it, and tighten it tightly so that there is no pain from the fracture or movement of the sthela.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And dress the concavity with water that fills it, until it is filled, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is an apoplexy, then you should stop the flow of blood from him and heal him quickly; and place a pad on it according to the order that precedes; and then return to his healing, and tighten him with ligatures in turns.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are broken bones or separated, then you should set them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter.xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the adjudicator.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjudicator is that which is between the neck and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the healing of him is in two ways, which are as follows: the first that you dress with a cloth of fust according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie both ends of the ligament, and then hang him from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a sleigh; and then pour a little water from his arm that is broken onto the cloth in such a way that it reaches the top of the wood where the curved part of the cloth is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or dress the patient' s openings in turns; and then heal the fracture with a medicine that comes from above, until the fracture returns according to the order.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the patient be raised on his neck and suspended with a ligament; and then order two servants that one of them hold water that is opened for the fracture, and another hold the pus from him, and each of them extend it to his opening.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the opening to be closed more strongly, then you should tighten it with a ligament and with another, and each of them extends his two openings.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then you should place it on half the ligament over the collar and the other half on the fracture, so that it is between them.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is far from the collar, then you should place it on the ligament over that place and on the collar itself.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Dress it with ease and do your best, and then tighten it if there is no pain from an apoplexy after you have dressed him.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is an apoplexy, then let it rest for seven days, and place a soft pad on it, wet with warm water and mixed with honey, until it stops, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to tighten that part is that you place a pad on the fracture, and then wrap it with a cloth; and then join the arms over the adjudicator, and place their hand on the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then tighten the cloth and tighten the arm in such a way that it is not in the place of the sthela, if water does not cause pain from a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use the sthela.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is that you place on the fracture a sthela that is stronger and further apart from other sthelas, and that is the length of the sthelas according to the fracture plus three times the width of the whole.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten it on the sthelas with the tightness that you have specified at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your tightness on the place of the fracture should be stronger.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is healed, your tightness on the place of the fracture should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you return to the situation of the bones and strictness as I have said at the hour when you restore the member to its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then leave the strictness and bones inside for seven days as I have said above.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the limb in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place of swelling or inflammation; or food is prohibited from reaching the member by means of a surplus of stricture; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are certain that there will be no cause of this, then do not delay the ligature for more than three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And its sleep on the patient's back, and their hands are on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause over the assistant cook full of wool swaddling, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member does not disappear nor become soft, so you correct it with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the food of the patient according to the order that we have mentioned above, so that the food is not delicate at the beginning until it has become harder; and then cover so that the food of him thickens.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the custom of the assistant and his blanket is that they are strengthened in ten days; and then cover so that bath is administered and medicine is given to him with which they correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is stiff, then you do not delay the ligature and bones inside for a day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two sockets; one of which is small, and is that which is called "push", and the other is large, and is that which is placed on the left side of the small one, from the upper part left.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And a strong fracture is made in the large socket only, or the small, and the locks are very strong together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small socket is broken above, then the restoration of him is light, and his cure is more rapid.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the small socket is broken below, the fracture of him is bad, and his cure is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than either is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then if the bone that is broken is the small socket above, then it is convenient to the doctor, according to the restoration of him, that he pause a little extension with ease within so that it be swaddled.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large socket is broken which is broken, then cover him with more vigor.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both sockets are broken together, then you shall pause the extension with more force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And so that you pause the form of the hand deviously before its restoration and extension on a cushion, and the palm of the hand be on the upper part, more than any other says, and the ear is more low than all the others, and the patient' side leans on a raised couch.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	A cushion before him in height or beside him, so that the patient does not fall asleep while working.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the left side to its full length at the side of the hand or ligament, and another minister extends it above all.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor swaddles the bone within so that it may be restored according to the best form that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there is no relief, then you shall pierce with your virtue all the flesh in its place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there is any separation of the flesh in it which hurts and does not satisfy you with its restoration, then you shall pass over it and do as I have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with pain, I have already written a special chapter on it, and therefore take the cure of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you make a bandage with wool swaddling and wax white, and it is not too tight between speculatio and subtilitas, and a strict bandage is placed on it with subtle within so that the abscess yields; and then remove the bandage and replace it with plaster made from powder of mint in water, and place the stelas; and let be the bone which is stretched over that fracture more to the left and more strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You should know that the number of steles in the arm is in five positions, or that fracture is in one socket or both sockets together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then you place your stricture on the place of the fracture more strongly and vigorously, and when it is not remembered at the beginning of this chapter, you place your stricture a little less wet according to that.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that envelop the fracture are soft and moist, not hard or sharp, and the thread used to tighten it is strong, so as I have said above.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Then consider the limb with the ligament for seven days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is any cause by which the cure must be made, then you shall dip the member in water to the tail so that that pruziment ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Then leave the member unconstrained within so that it rests, and then return to the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is already restored to its form, then correct everything according to your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if food is prohibited from reaching the member by way of superfluity of stricture, for it is customarily called gout. For then you soften that a little and leave it alone for several days so that there is no risk of that with regard to food, and then strengthen it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if there is no cause of those which we have said, then do not delay the disconnection for more than a few days or less.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then hang up the patient' side from a vertical beam with his virtue of movement, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You should know that this fracture is restored in three months or in three and twenty days, or strong is restored in twenty eight days, and everything depends on the complexios and the virtue of it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Hand and Fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that with regard to the fingers of the hand and the nails of them there is a fracture, and do not appear any of them with small wounds.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is fracture or injury to the hand, then cover it with a raised couch before him in equalitas, and place the palm of the hand on the extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor swaddles them within so that they are tightly wrapped.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then cover with plaster and chalk if there is not an abscess; and place the stelas above according to the quantity of the space, and you have enveloped it in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the lock is in the inner part of the hand, then make a bandage of cloth, and order the patient to tighten his hand with it; place it tightly wrapped with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Then let be the stela of wood on the cloth so that it is lifted up, so that the wood is applied to the palm; and place it strongly according to that.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is above the elbow, then cover that part with one hand and another with the palm of the hand so that the limb is uncovered and straight; and then hold the stricture in place while you turn the limb over between your two hands.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in any of the bones of the foot, then if it is the little toe that is affected, cover that part with your hand and hold it firmly; and if necessary, turn the limb over so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any of the other toes, then if it is at the base of that toe or the middle joint, or the ear or ring finger, then cover and hold it with your hand; or all of them together, which is better; or hold over a small elbow, as we have said above.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your recovery, and then place the affected part in a position that reduces pain; - with the right operation - so that it covers whatever causes those symptoms, according to what has been said above in the narrative of this work.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Bones of the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is broken and the feeling is lost; it is discovered that the fracture has moved forward and the top part has become raised.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the limb is as follows: tighten the joint over the fracture and hold it tightly; place the patient on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends the whole limb in its position according to quality when the fracture is at the base of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is at the tip of the thigh, then hold the limb forward at the hip joint; and if it is at the tip of the leg, then hold the limb back at the knee joint; so that the extension hits its target, and the other limb holds the fracture in place.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if it is at the tip of the thigh, then make the extension forward to the hip joint; and if it is at the tip of the leg, then make it backward to the knee joint; so that the extension hits its target.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor joins the bones together with a plaster and a strapping, if it is not already broken at that point; but if it is, then cover it with a bandage and a tight strap.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if it is broken in the limb that has been affected, then leave it for several days so that the wound heals; and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strapping of the limb is done as follows: wrap a hard bandage around the fracture; then double it two or three times and remove any excess; and then wrap the chest, leg, and thigh together so that it reaches to the tail and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long cord between the thigh and the chest, near the hip joint, to the bottom of the leg; and make the ends of the cord come out at the top part of the two limbs, and then turn them over the bandage and skin, removing anything that is too loose.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place a small elbow over the thigh in the place of that fracture above the hip joint; and place another under the chest, so that they hold the limb straight.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill in any gaps between the bandage and skin with a soft fabric, so that it is tight; and then cover the whole limb in a loose cloth.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then start with a strong strap from the middle over the place of the fracture, with three or four wrappings; and if you want to add more straps, then do so in places where there is space for them, making your straps smaller and looser and less damp as they go upwards.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the ends of the cord to the bottom of the leg until it reaches the heel of the foot, and strengthen them both; and then make the other end of the string come out at the top part of the two limbs so that the limb does not move out of its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave that strap in place, assuming it does not cause any problems with corruption, an ulcer, or swelling; and if it causes any of those things, then take care of it well; and correct what happens to it, according to what we have said above about the movement of the limbs.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is thicker than that upon which you are placing it, then cover it as best you can; and if not, then put it under it, and correct it with a cord; and treat it with the water from which the memory comes, until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by making an adjustment to the limb's joints, as we have said above about the aid given by the assistant and by the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb, this should not cause any limping; and if it is restored on its own, then apply another bandage to the other leg, so that this one will not have to limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh is strengthened in ten to twelve days or a little more or less, and everything depends on the diversity of the circumstances and the other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle Joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the ankle joint is discovered behind; and if it has been broken in front, then leave it for several days so that it heals, and then treat it.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture has occurred, then it is only a split or a crack in its joints; and if it is in front, leave it for several days so that it heals, and then treat it as one would treat a wound; and in the meantime, all you need to do is what we have said above about the treatment.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the limb is as follows: join it together with a bandage that covers any split or break in its joints, and which reaches from one limb to the other, holding them together; and then secure it so that it does not come apart, and make it as easy as possible to construct and fabricate.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then wrap the limb in a round bandage if you want to; and hold it tightly with a strap; and then add more straps as needed to support the joint.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the treatments we have recommended for other fractures, assuming it is also broken; and avoid any accident that may happen to it, until it has healed completely, following the treatment described above for similar cases.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Chest.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the chest there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the chest bone; and the other is small, and is called the rib bone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	It occurs to both sexes of people in the following fractures of the arm bones; and this is also the restoration of those limbs by wrapping them, which is a single operation for both arms and legs.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the chest becomes completely dislocated.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the smaller rib is broken, then the chest is dislocated in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger chest bone is broken, then it falls to the side; and such cases are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer the following in equal proportions according to the wrapping of each limb.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the chest is very thin, so that it cannot be wrapped, then make the strappings lighter and less stiff; and rejoice in your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the chest there are certain operations that need to be done on the arms; and you wrap the limbs together with the straps, completing the whole operation; then you will have no need of large nails; and make small holes in the palms, as is necessary for smaller ones, not too big; and if they are too big, then use a needle to thread the string through them; and tie those strings according to the length of the chest from the hip joint to the elbow joint, and the other way around.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And wrap each drape in two wraps according to its length, and place one over the junction of the leg on one side and the other from the other side, and let them be wrapped from below at the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place the two stakes in three places of the two extremities and at the middle, for with this orientation the spine is prevented from inclining to the right or left, and it is in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a breastplate of leather has been administered according to the length of the spine; and let the spine be placed so that it retains its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most commonly you should pour water on a fracture, and when it has been done to him it is called properly gout.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the spine each day and study it carefully to follow up, and you guard it from swelling and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those happens, then stop putting water on him until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and of the following diseases.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the talus bone does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot happens a fracture in some places; and to the feet few happen a fracture, and do not happen to them except at the tips in their middles of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if a fracture happens to the bones of the foot and these bones are raised up over themselves, then return the patient to the ground prepared in this way as he goes.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place one foot on the water that is raised by those bones, and press them down, and wrap them up in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And place plaster and stop on top of it, and return the patient's belly to a small table which have two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And stretch those legs out by the feet down, because you have wrapped them up with drapes and with other causes from which they are relieved.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days pass by, then untie the ligature because you will think that the bones are wrapped up, or they are twisted or displaced, and the operation on them is as such with care.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of the feet are twisted, then restore those, and wrap them up as you wish and order to you in the restoration of the feet' joints from the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the twisted stake according to its length, and place it on one side a little; then return the foot to the table which you were ordered, and stretch those legs out by the feet down.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if the twisted bones are two or three or more, then you place each one wrapped in drap leather over a stake, and stretch the table up at the base of the foot, and let it stand on one side of the table so that the belly of the foot is held in good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and stop putting water on any accident.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the kneecap of the woman and the bones of the penis and of the man's jaw.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's kneecap is twisted, then make it cut in the crotch divided, and bring this one to the junction of the two legs slightly, and let it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the wife will wrap her kneecap up, and make it stay in its place with care; and the woman will be injured, and raise the two legs little by little, because all this is painful and the twisted bone returns to its place with care and relief from pain.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powder on the two legs, and when he wants to urinate, he removes the crotch easily and urinate, and reduce it and return it following the same method as you followed at the beginning, and then return to his powder first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And let that be done for seven days or more, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want to, take a bladder of oil and place it on the crotch of him with a bulb; and insert all the bladder into the kneecap, and blow into the bladder within the kneecap, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be filled with oil and leave it for a few days according to what we have said, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the man' or woman's penis is twisted, then administer in the restoration and relief of water which we have said in the bones of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And the water that is on the right does not hide these nearby fractures and few occur, mostly to the person who studies and uses this book; because those fractures indicate to you in the main dispositions of the right way in the restoration and stricture of him, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the man' jaw when it is twisted, take an oil-based paste, and place it on the wrapped drape, and wrap him up, and let it be left for three days or more, and it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones when they are aching.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to you that the fracture is aching, and mostly if the bone is large, such as the femur or the pelvis, or similar to it, that you lie down and move him sometimes if the conditions of the fluids permit you to do so; otherwise, follow what we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the ache flows, then stop that you lie down in the retention of him until he is completely healed, and if there is another cause that does not appear, then sprinkle on top of him powdered oil, or a similar thing.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And begin to restore the fracture in him as soon as possible, and do not delay doing it; if there is no swelling.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if the swelling occurs slowly, then you leave the restoration of him until the ninth day, until it has gone away, and do not bring him close to the third day or the fourth, because you will cause other accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the twisted bone is about to break through the skin, then stop putting it back and wrap it up with your clothes or a similar thing, easily and slowly.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and it is not possible to make a cast for him with his own clothes, then you reduce it with your hand easily; and this instrument that I have spoken of is made of iron, its length is seven or eight days and its width is according to the quantity of the ache; and this one is necessary for the doctor to take from those three or four according to the amount of the ache in any specific cure for any kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be rolled up, and hold it with his hand easily; so that it does not bend the compression on him in the hour of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it be of acute end that has margin on its ends; and let the one side of him be held with great care, and most of the other side within the joints.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how you do it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labra volentzaratelam", which means "a little wheel".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the end of him be raised and supported above the end of the bone that is about to break through.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And place it on a flat surface until the bone has returned, and wrap it up with an equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so try to bite the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end that is broken is delicate, and you do not have that instrument for a good grasp, then cover that you insert the end of that bone where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone altogether with that we have recommended, then cut that one with which we have spoken; or saw it with some of the saws in some way or another, as is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And place that which remains on the bone with sharp points and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the foot is severe and burning, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do you give the patient much relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your repair of the bone is complete, and then cover it with a black syrup, especially if it is in summer, and do not pause on the skin of cerott or any other cause that would cause it to be damaged and corrupted.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer a salve in the hour of the full moon when you complete the repair of the bone, and leave the skin uncovered until it heals; cut it with scissors if it is thick, and use wrapping according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And keep yourself with all care from stretching the wound over the fracture, because it can produce bad blood, and if it causes pain in the patient's feet, it may cause death or a corrupting disease or putridity, so that it heals.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient' s stiffness is mild, soft, different from the stiffness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you are afraid of an accident with those we have recommended, and feel pain in that place, then do not cover it with a salve; rather wrap it with hard cloth instead of a salve, and tighten it up well.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a day or two after that the wound begins to discharge, which is a good sign, then do you remove the cloth that you had placed on it, and administer water, with our custom that we treat wounds, thus with water of four parts and herb to it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should know that you must make the limb move and consider the wound every day from morning to evening until it is healed and sealed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that corruption will run from it to the joints more easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes more than a few days and is not healed or separated from it, then know that there are only two outcomes for this: either the patient dies, or they will have an infection.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those outcomes that are separated and remain, and of those that are not separated and put the member in danger and cause pain, then try to cut them as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is swollen or black, it is a sign of heat; or another kind of corruption or putrefaction, then you should pause and take any of those that we have recommended for its cure, which is preceded in our book in the chapter dealing with it.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in that place where you must speak your best words and present your case clearly: When it is heavy, use the instrument of the thigh and of the support, and wrap it with cloth around the large bones; and do not assume attraction from it, or extrication from it because bad blood may flow through it and cause death; let that remain where it can be easily found, for if it is lost, it cannot be recovered. And so leave it there for three days, and then cut it off with a sharp instrument. and then treat the wound if you can, and if not, let that remain.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the Cure for a Swelling That Occurs from a Fracture
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This swelling occurs in the trace of a healing fracture, and most often it is located near the joints, and its shape is strong enough to prevent the member from performing its normal function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have been used in it, such as: bloodroot, or allium, or wormwood; and if some of them are missing, or all of them, and apply those to the swelling with a salve, and tighten those over it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let that constriction remain there for a few days; and then remove it and try again, except that you place a thin plate of lead over the swelling, because lead has the property of retaining all the fluid that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already become hard and strict, and necessity forces you to cut it open, then cut it at the most secure part of it, and remove the excess fluid and fat, or if there is only a little fat, cut it off with a sharp instrument; and then treat that place where healing can take place.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter xxii.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the Repair of a Fracture When Restored and Return the Member to its Natural State with Freedom of Movement.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone has been repaired, and return the member to its subtle state with freedom of movement, then it should not be done unless: because there is a great number of solutions for the limb and connection between them, which may prevent nutrition from reaching the member; or because of an excess of strictness in the limbs through which nutrients cannot reach the member; or because of too much useless mixture; or because of excessive movement that is not appropriate at that time; or because of pause in the blood flow to the body and for the purpose of dispelling it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And cure that wound by causing the patient to gain weight and make his heart strong, so that the blood is multiplied in it; and administer a bath; and pierce the nose and lips.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then pause with a bandage on the member, so that the bandage brings nutrition to it, or continue with an emulsion of it in water, within which nutrition flows and returns to its normal shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the Cure for Cracked Bones When Restored by a Twisting and Prohibiting of Their Operation from That Which Causes It.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member has been restored by a twisting and healed of the fracture and nodulation, and there is a swelling on it that does not prevent its normal function, then you may take the word of one who says that this member is new-twisted.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Already there are some good medicines and restorers that have done this on our land; and this operation is very contemptible, and it is against the law of nature, which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the claudication and swelling are recent, then consider that they be bathed in water with herbs that soften it, such as: leaves of althaea and razors of the plant, and melilot, and similar to those; or that it be soaked in a paste of molasses made from leaves of althaea and rubbed with the oil of caraway, or that it be covered with a paste of gualine dye mixed with olive oil, and wrapped with a cloth; or that it be dipped in a paste of honey made from the seeds of chamomile, and wrapped with a bandage; or that it be dipped in a paste of butter made from the seeds of chamomile, and wrapped with a cloth; or that it is trussed with string made from colza, and similar to those medicines that are called gradual consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times are dissolved by the continuous light friction that is given to the most moist ones, and the movement of the member is administered from the very beginning in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if there is already a tortuosity in advance and it is done strongly and turned into pain and necessity of cure with iron, then cover that pus on it and continue the bone, and what is superfluous from the nodulation of that member to the bone with very fine incisions, and this is administered easily on it with sollicitation and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is entirely of some of the joints of the limb, by which movement is prevented, and the figure of the member is twisted, and great pains and injuries come upon the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when it happens that there is a dislocation, then immediately pierce that it be reduced, and do not delay such reduction, because if it is delayed, the place is swollen and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore it does not come that it be moved or stretched in the hour of the piercing, for it brings about spasm and pains that are relaxed.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when it happens to you, then cover yourself in the flabotomy of the patient's side, and let that rest until it is relaxed; and reduce the member easily with ease by dipping it in warm oil.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members are cured with the water of which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already seen and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to which it is preceded in fracture; from the top of the body above to the bottom of the body below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter.xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of cure of dislocation of the patient's jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws if they are not tightened; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are loosened from their places by a little movement, or they are completely dislocated and fully separated, so that they are softened at the beginning of the joint within which saliva comes out of the patient's mouth, and it cannot hold it nor close its mouth, and the tongue of it is wrapped up in words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	And when the dislocation of him is a little, then, according to his major dispositions, he returns by himself a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	And if the dislocation is whole and complete, then it is administered reduction of him lightly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the servant has the head of the patient, and enters it between his teeth with its own tongue at the root of dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or that he enters both of them together, if the dislocation is of two sides, and the others outside where they are; and orders the patient to cease his jaws and do not move them in any way; and the tongue wraps around it and ties it up within so that it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him is difficult, and more so if both of the jaws are completely dislocated, then administer vapor to it with warm oil, within which the reduction of both is done lightly and not delayed at all in the reduction of both from all; otherwise, as I have already said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore, when it returns and is wrapped up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those dust of cloth with a cotton ball, and be made of wax and oil rosin; and be tied easily with ease by means of soft string.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head be between two pillows, that he not moan at all; and do not pass by force any cause; having the patient' food forbidden to be eaten, so that when the pains are relived and the jaws are no longer aching, then make him eat.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let that water be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth with eating or drinking, so that the jaw is aching and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then immediately pierce them with piercing, and very strongly pour the water on them, and very strong and vomiting colic.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that water is lost, then know that it is a loss; and immediately pierce the patient in which it has happened within 10 days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter.xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reduction of the dislocation of the patient's furcula and of the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the neck within because of its continuous connection to the chest; and some are dislocated at the end outside, and this is shown by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient jumps on his two sides and spreads his arms wide.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cut the place with your hand firmly, for it will return again.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then pause on that paste and dust, and stretch it strongly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And the end of that which seizes and continues to it is not dislocated in any way within the day; then reduce and wrap it up according to what I have said, and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on that paste, and dust, and stretch it strongly, and order the patient to be quiet and at rest within so that he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this member' cure, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter.xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except according to three ways, and the one is that it is dislocated at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck at the end of the neck.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it be dislocated at the end of its own muscle, and this is done with difficulty; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and comes out at the ends of the neck, and mostly in those where the muscles are few, it is slightly dislocated; but in those where the muscles are many, they come out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very strong pains happen in some men by hitting or bumping, and the patient' muscle is swollen with swelling, and it is discovered by water that has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, when you hope for water within so that you are above it, and then proceed to the patient' cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of him is similar to what happens at the ends of the neck; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, because you can hear a very different sound; and hear the concavity of the neck at the end of the neck, and the touch of the head of the muscle in this way how much, and to the patient' head can not reduce his hand to his ear, nor does it move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	And if it is dislocated from the side or behind, then immediately hear a very different sound, and do not turn your head back;
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, a little reduction is made when the patient is fresh and his water is warm.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister lifts his hand from above their legs; and nearby he stops the threads that support them, and raises the joint with strength to its place, and the minister lifts his hand, and extends it in front of him; and nearby he stops those, for she returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if by chance that I have said does not return, and only at the beginning that occurs a dislocation, days let's wait, when the patient is bathed in cold water and is administered brocacion that softens it and makes it loose like hair, and fenugreek, and meletol in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient is raised on his back and is stopped from below from turning, waiting for the wool to be engorged between levitation and constriction, and nearby the doctor stops his leg from above, and raises his head with strength, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not twisted on the sides, and another minister holds his head, because it should not be twisted on the sides, since it returns to its place lightly.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it in this way: and it is that you are present a man who is taller than the patient, and he is on the side of him, and enters his muscle from below turning of the patient, and raises his turn to the sides above their legs while the patient hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the patient' hand from the sides of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is light, wait until you know that another cause does not exist, because this one returns lightly, since the dislocation comes back quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in an appropriate way: and it is that he is placed on the ground a long staff whose head is rounded in shape, like a mortar, which is not thick or narrow, and nearby it is stopped from below by the patient; then, because it is stopped above the patient's head, and the patient stands according to the length of the staff, and its hand is extended to the sides with strength, since the joint comes back to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of him is difficult for all the reasons that we have said, use this cure: and it is that you take a staff whose length is two bras, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is reduced in the top according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And nearby, on the rounded head, are tied leathery straps so that the staff does not slip from the patient' head.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And nearby it is stopped from below the patient' turn, and its hand or arm is extended over the staff in front of its legs, tying the staff on the assistant's side and the arm, and its end on the other side.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed on a step, according to its width, and the hand is extended in front of its legs, and the other side is suspended from the other side, because the joint comes back quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete according to every possible way that you can manage it, and nearby you stop from below the patient' turn of wool a quantity; and nearby stop the paste prepared with powder of mill and egg white on all the muscle, so that it is rolled up, and nearby tighten it from below by constriction, and the bandage is rolled up on the paste, and its hand is connected to the neck, and it is left, and its hand is not twisted for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And since the patient' food is stopped a little while, until the member is comfortable, because it returns lighter to its healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And nearby the food is given more often after seven days and is practiced a movement; and when it stops being stiff and does not become softer, then it has healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated there are seen drops of moisture that occur on it or by another cause, nearby it is administered a cauterization with three steps, according to what has been said before in the chapter about cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if it still does not heal and seven days have passed, the bandage and the constriction are reduced a little on him, and it is not stiff and tight, and he cannot lift his arm to its sides, then you will know that the nerves of it, which go up to its head, have already separated or become loose or softened, and you will know that the joint will never heal in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done to the feet and the breast or back parts, the reduction is done by thrusting and stretching to its sides, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And be administered in that other constriction, and care for that one until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if by chance there is late healing in the limb and delay in its movements, then the patient uses cold water nearby until that gravity is relieved and returns to its natural state first.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, mostly at the front of the front and back sides, and the dislocation of it does not disappear from your side when you are turned away or touched according to some shape, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, then you will know that the joint has become concave and cannot bend the arm or touch it with its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And if your patient is, reduce the dislocation as quickly as possible because, if you see it in cauterization, reducing it is difficult, and it does not heal completely; and more so at the back parts, because it is more difficult of all the other dislocations, and it is more painful, and nearby are seen drops of blood on him, then that one will die.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of him, when it is possible to reduce him, is that his hand be extended with two arms, and his hands are open, and the doctor' hands are on the shoulder and below it, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in front of its parts, then return it in this way that his hand touches with his own hand, until it hits the shoulder with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent stretching and move it strongly.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It is that two ministers extend their arms, and hold him up with two ministers so that he does not fall over from the stretching.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arms are rolled up a long way on the hands of him, and nearby is wrapped in a long cloth over his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he lubries it with any oil so that it helps in lubricating the joint easily; and nearby pushes the joint with a violent thrust until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then the reduction of him is done nearby he is stopped on the paste in which it is constricted and stretched with egg white, and is left suspended from the neck, and is left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it is unbound; and if the joint returns to its place, then you unbind the bandage of him and leave him.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it for a few days until it is well; and then take it off.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens that the gravity approaches the reduction of the joint, and the disposition is in motion, then administer moisture in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint to be relieved, unless it is a movement of great speed; and then tie it up, and leave it over the bone for a day and a night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then lift it up, and put it in a bath; and when it has eased, then you shall rub the joint with gentle friction, and repeat over that to be relieved, unless it is grumbling of movement, once, and the second, and third time.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already come about on the denouement of the bath, so that it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause on that cow's split with wet and sharp edge pressing upon it; and make it a few times, for that is wet and reduces its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of treatment of a dislocation of the shoulder, if it is of the joint that is between the arm and the body.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Of the shoulder a few bones are displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, and the opposite is of the other joints, but it is necessary that speed be in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, before the place be sore or that accide on it a contusion.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you pause the joint of the arm of the patient on a table and the minister extends the arm of him, and the metge pauses his hand or palm over the proximity of the joint, and presses it in until he returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But it is necessary that be considered if the palm already is seen to the belly of the arm, then the patient pause both hands on a table directly and the reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then both hands are in front, then place the hand of the minister intricately over the table, so that his hand box on that proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then if it returns soon, it is good; and if not, then apply pressure to it with bandage allowing the contusion to go away, and do not repeat this, for in case that it does not return soon, it will suffer or will not be able on the reduction of it until it pass a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But the joint is second according to its tortuosity; and there is no reason to the patient, except that his hand is softened and cannot be strong for any reason; then know that the nerves are torn or twisted, and it does not come in him unless it is strong by cauterizing properly its end and strongly pressing it gives some reason.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then if it returns bad, then pause on it the bandage that we have repeated, and let it be and strengthen it for a few days; and then take it off and exercise his hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is little and it happens that there approaches some gravity, then apply pressure to it with water tail and gentle friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of treatment of a dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some times the fingers are dislocated all together.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger is dislocated with the two of his hand or the belly of it, then stretch that finger and press its reduction a few times, until he returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend it from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then hang him and extend him until it becomes one with that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is quiet at night, then apply pressure to it according to that narrative, and do not cease to untie him in the day and exercise its movement, and let him be for a few days until he is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do it similar to him, if it is dislocated to the belly of the arm, and let him hang at that part and make its first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do it similar to him when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of treatment of a dislocation of the spine of the arm.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	And when there approaches a dislocation of the spine of the arm or of the neck, and it does not remain in its place, then in that there is no treatment, for death hides from the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is without will, and cannot hold it; and some members of his are softened or two bones of his or two arms of his, or one of those; or it is moved from its place, for in some cases it is moved, and in some others it is made.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that has already been moved to the back parts and is called gelbozitat.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of it is that you consider if the gelbozitat comes from poultice, because there is no treatment nor healing in this case.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from contact or impact or resembling those, they said the ancient ways of treatment with long words, of which some return to profanation; and some have taken away from it for too much of it, because of my proximity to the beginning and my exposure to it, I have taken it away and formed it a different instrument than that with which I had shown it and spayed it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gelbozitat that happens from the front in the foot, there is no treatment nor healing of that; and seemingly in that which is made to two parts.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those is not healed except that which happens properly, as I have repeated it.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient is extended on its face over a mat, and the instrument is wet by his side so it is not dried up his foot.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a staff is hung straight, placed on the ground at the tip of his foot turning his head, and another in its back in the other extreme of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds that staff, and does not stop in a ditch; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then he wraps his head with a cloth and holds it firm; and he extends the tip of the limb to the staff that is held by him, and let him be; and then he strengthens the other limb under his belly, and lets him be; and then he adjusts all the limbs and lets them be in the other staff that is held by him, and he holds those feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister drops him and extends his limb to the end of the staff, and does not hold the two staffs and limbs in their places in which they are fixed, but holds them in a certain way; however, it is not held thus as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the minister pauses his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or that he pauses them over a table, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this form, then take a table whose width or length is in the air of three arms, and place in the wall in which I have said that is close to the patient a place where the end of the table enters.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the table's edge on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the opposite end, and he notes immediately that the spine is pinched and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the one that is turned towards the back; and it is that you stay on the ground you must place the head of the patient behind the leg two pegs, the length of which is a arm, and you must place the head of him behind the leg exactly the same two pegs; and be the length that there is between any peg one palm, and already is done in any peg turn away from the ground, and each is stopped firmly on the ground so that it does not fall.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And also a round stick in which there is the turn, and it is turned away in the two pegs of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of him is a hole in which there is the peg, its length being a palm so that it turns away; and in the other two sticks is similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ties that you have put on the legs of the patient in the hole through which the head must pass, and the ties that you have put on the thighs of him in the turn through which the feet must pass.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then it is necessary that each turn and there is a servant who twists the turn towards his hand, and the doctor crushes the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then that the spine has returned, and the place is crushed, it is customarily that you put an exsiccate paste of white wine on a sponge, and then cover; and then place over the paste the table edge from which its width is three fingers or less than those, and its length is quantity to fill the space of the yellowness, and in front of the spine so.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then be tied with a tie that we have said, and use the patient's diet of subtle food as it is cured.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is a certain imminence in the place at the end of the cure, it is customarily that you administer medicines that moilify and soften to the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a piece of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases it is imminent in the back of the two spine, and it is broken by that dislocation; and this is the bone which we have already mentioned for you not to be forced to make any compromise with him with this medicine, because it will be strong enough to kill him.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of Cure of Ankylosis (Dislocated Hips)
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the tendon connection do not cause anything but dislocation only, and this does not happen in those cases that it happens to other joints with small movement and concave shape.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, since it is dislocated at the front and back, or at the sides, or at the front and back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mainly it is dislocated at the front and slightly to the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of him to the front and inside is that, when you adjust the curve of the patient's body in a healthy way, it becomes longer and the back is more curved than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his head because the tongue has come out; and this is the place where the tongue has come out from being in.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that one that happens to dislocation is at the sides, it is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that one that happens to dislocation at the front is that it opens its curve in a perfect way, but in addition, it does not bend the back and it hurts; and if it penetrates into going and he cannot walk because of it; and his urine is repressed and his tongue is inflamed, and it must move on foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that one that happens to dislocation at the back is that it does not open its curve, nor bend his back and it hurts; and if he bends his front side so that he bends his tongue, and his tongue becomes inflamed, and this is the place where the tongue has come out.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of these spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already become ancient and old with you; and if it is not in this cure, and at that time it does not happen to be necessary to make any compromise with him.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that one of which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four spices of dislocation, then you must move the joint and extend it at the sides and at the front, and put it to the left and right, because it will return strongly and it will not need any other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you prepare a very strong servant and extend the curve of him from the side that is more to the left, or on his back, or with a tie that is tied to his back; and another servant extends the hand of him above his head, and if he feels pain, then make a cut at the joint, and if he does not feel pain, then cut it; and another servant tightens the knot on his back, and has another servant hold his feet.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is extended of him or of the side that is more to the left to the joint that is at the hip, or from the back to the hip of two.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is extended in all these ways within one case, so that the patient is raised on his back with his feet hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is very specific to all four cases.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns in the way that we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to all the spices that will direct from its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of him alone, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the front sides, then the patient is laid on his back in that position; and then place the ties on the root of his throat at that place where the tongue is inside; and then extend the ties from the side that is more up to the hip.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another strong servant takes his arms, and tightens the place of the patient' s throat with it, and extends it at the sides by violent extension because that one returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This type is less serious cure with which this member is reduced than the other spices.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it does not obey on you to this type of cure of all members, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong knot, and take both hands above the shoulders; and tie them together on both sides and on both backs.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And be the length of each one of them by the quantity of four fingers, and be the curve of him extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then hang the patient from his feet on to the beam, and that it be in the middle; and be the length of him from the ground by a quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then order a strong young man to cut off the head of the patient, and hang it from the other side with a strong rope; and another young man pulls the body up by the rope because the joint returns quickly to its place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	When the dislocation occurs on the outside, cover that the patient lies on his side according to what we have already told when it has been heated; and strengthen the joint above the hernia itself and above its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then place two paddles, one on the patient's feet and the other on his head; and place some damp rags around the joints that are being stretched to prevent the patient from getting wet by the water between their legs, so that the extension to the extremities does not pull out.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then each servant extends his part, and the doctor puts his hand on the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey in reverse, lady, greatly; and otherwise, pause over that carefully and so as we have said when heated by that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Cover that the patient keeps still on his side.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is on the front side, then cover that the chest is extended slightly, and it is according to this narrative on the patient's back; and the doctor puts his right hand on the hernia side, and close that with the other hand, and extends it to the sides of the legs at the hip.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is on the back side, then do not cover that the hernia is extended to the sides of the legs, and raise it above the ground; keeping in mind that it is paused on a hard thing, so as when the joint between the legs is displaced on the outside, according to what we have said about the engagement of them on two boards; and it is on its face and the joints are extended, as we have said, not bent.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	Cover that a compressive massage is given to the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is completed according to that, and the sign of the patient's reduction is not hidden from you, and it is because you extend two boards on him, and when you see those joints engaged and the hernia expands its area by two inches, then know that the second member has returned; and then you adjust two cushions and pause a cloth, and so the board does not bend in any of the sides; and fasten the hernia to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then return the joint and the cloth, and compare one board with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints engaged in a vestment, then know that the dislocation is already stopped, and let the patient go away.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply that one, and stretch the other according to your first order, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then return that one, and allow that one to walk with a limp for some days, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of treatment of dislocation from the hip.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The hip is displaced according to three ways: because it is displaced on the outside, and on the inside, and on the sides more on the inside than on the outside; and is not displaced on the front side.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of a dislocated hip is because you order the hernia to apply its chest to the cushion; then know that the hip is displaced.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its parts is that you pass over the hernia's side right, and then extend its chest, if it can on this; adhere the two to the patient' face, and pause his foot between these; and another servant applies pressure between its feet with strength, and other ministers extend its foot until the hip returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery is because its chest adheres to the cushion with a light effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then return that one and apply its chest to the cushion, and then bind those limbs together with a light cloth for three days or four, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the hernia for walking for some days until it is relieved and relieved.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Then, if the reduction to you is not explained, then administer a strong massage on the joints in the treatment of the hernia.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter LIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the tongue.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The tongue is sometimes jarred by a little movement, and sometimes it is displaced according to the fall, and its displacement occurs on the inside or on the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of a dislocated tongue is that it swells according to the fall in which it is displaced.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of a little movement of the tongue is easy recovery, and it is that it is extended with ease to the sides and is engaged until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the tongue is displaced according to a fall, then do as if you were right, and have another strong and brave servant keep his side in your place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then return to you with the right hand of the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand at the lower side of the foot in the place of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then return the foot to you with the right hand, and throw it two times with the left hand, and then extend it with the left hand; and protect the feet of the upper part with the right hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Then make two steps according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then return the feet to the chest on the third step, and you are in the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then return one time or two times according to this way, and if the foot is engaged, it is good; otherwise, then perform the operation again, because that one returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Then, if to you is forbidden the reduction of the tongue by water which we have recommended, then make the hernia perform on its side on the ground, and apply a dry cloth to it so that it does not come out; and wrap a cloth around the patient so that it does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the servant of the patient holds its joints, and another minister extends his foot with the hand or limb that lies on the hip; and then extend that one against the extension of its side, and the cloth between the hernia' sides so that the body does not come out by the extension to the sides.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor absorbs the displacement with his hand, and another minister holds the patient' side, because the displacement returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then, when the displacement returns and is declared to you the recovery of the patient' tongue, then return the compressive massage and apply it with force, and bind the foot to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Then you will be protected or guarded from the nerves that are behind on the tongue, so that the joint on that one is not violent and strong.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then return that one for two days or three; and if the joint is softened, apply it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then return that one after three days, and do not allow the hernia to walk for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Then, if it is necessary to walk in front of that space, it is not necessary that the displacement is on the tongue, dissolved and corrupted; then return that one because it does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him when you administer to him in the treatment of his tongue that which we have preceded in our narrative on another place of cure and cure, then return that one because it is jarred.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On treating a dislocated joint of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	If that which is dislocated is small and can be pushed in with a little force, it is easy to reduce; but if not, it must be done cautiously.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then return the patient to the ground or table, and reduce it as if he were going out.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then return to the feet, and place the big toe on top of that which is dislocated, pressing it firmly down so that it does not move, and so that it may be reduced; and let him see if it has been reduced and does not protrude.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place under the foot a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends and is strong and firm for three days; then, after reducing it, let him rest from walking for four days, so that it does not hurt and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the different types of dislocations that are caused by pain or fracture or some other means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those occurs, and you take on the treatment of that and seek to restore it, many bad outcomes must be feared.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And in treating it, do not be hasty, merciful and compassionate, late, not impatient or proud; but use only those medicines that have a mild effect, and leave the patient to the divine judgement, but give hope of salvation from destruction, and some relief of pain.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then make every effort to reduce it as soon as the cause occurs, before the disease takes hold and causes vomiting.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Then, if the limb returns quickly, administer a remedy that causes vomiting and treats the fever with cool water.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If the dislocation is due to a fracture and the bones are separated, then you must set them, and do it in such a way that there is no pain in the simple cases of such things as precede in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my prediction precedes you; for it is better to you that you should serve your Lord, and remain persistent in your glory, and increase in your goodness to the true Creator, and increase in your benefits.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucaimi which he has explained perfectly from them, for God is pleased with him.
Amen.	Amen.
